A B C's of Science 

A B C's of Science


 By CHAS. OLIVER 

1 


A B C's of Science 

CHAPTER I 

THE SUPREME POWER OF NATURE 

1. Supreme power of Nature is comprised of all. 
2. It may be divided into three parts: Mineral, Vegetable, and 
Animal. 
3. Mineral is comprised of Mineral Matter and Mineral Magnetism. 
4. Animal is comprised of Animal Matter and Animal Magnetism. 
5. Vegetable is comprised of Vegetable Matter and Vegetable 
Magnetism. 
6. Each of the foregoing have life, and by cooperating with each other 
produce life that flourishes. 
7. There being as many different kinds of Magnetism as there are 
matter which is beyond the strength of human to classify. 
8. The supreme power of Nature had no beginning so it has no end; its 
life is indestructible. 
[Figures: Five line-drawings, captioned as follows. "Comet of 
1881, the year Mother Shipton prophecied the Earth to come to an end." 
"Comet of 1744." "Comet of 1857." "Biela's comet discovered in 1827. 
returned at intervals of 6 1/2 years. In 1846 it returned split, returned in 
1852, but never appeared since." "Saturn."] 

2 


A B C's of Science 

 CHAPTER II

 ASTRONOMY 

(The word "vapor" used in general for water, ice, atmosphere, etc.) 

1. Space without beginning or end, filled with unmaterial and material 
life. The material is in motion by the currents of unmaterial life. 
2. The material is in perfect bodies, imperfect bodies, and 
unconcentrated material. 
3. Perfect bodies group into constellation, called sun's planets, 
planetoids, and moons. 
4. Imperfect bodies are comets, called periodic and parabolic comets. 
5. Unconcentrated material called Milky Ways, and rings such as are 
around Saturn. 
6. The unmaterial life currents run in every conceivable manner. I 
will call the currents carrying constellation sun currents, planet currents, 
planetoid currents, moon currents, and comet currents, respectively. 
Milky ways eddys. 

7. Saturn is the only body we know which has an unconcentrated 
obsequious attendant. Such rings may appear around constellations, 
planets, moons, etc. 
These rings can be accounted for in two ways,--first, the material 
never being concentrated; second, by two or more bodies coming together 
and throwing the bodies into atoms. 

8. Suck, or Nebula, currents form in the Milky ways (the same as two 
or more currents of air coming together and making a whirlwind), which 
concentrates the material into bodies, thus forming constellations and 
comets; also rings such as are around Saturn. 
If a constellation is formed its current is called sun current, and here it 
continues to whirl with all its subordinate currents, planet, planetoid, and 
moon. 

9. Comets are caused by sun currents' pressure forcing the suck 
currents at a great speed, and forces the comet current to pass through sun 
currents. Some comets pass in and out of their sun currents at regular 
3


A B C's of Science 

intervals and are called periodic, i.e., its orbit is an ellipse. 

Comets that are parabolic will never return to their starting point and 
travel wild. 

10. 
Bodies may be destroyed by suck currents carrying bodies in collision 
with each other; if the bodies are equal size, will throw the material into 
atoms. If a small and large body come in collision the small body will 
bury itself in the greater. Bodies thrown into atoms, the atoms may 
continue to be carried by its respective current (as rings around Saturn), or 
the atoms may be forced beyond its current and pass as shooting stars to 
other bodies or milky ways. 

11. Nebula is the suck current in the process of condensing material 
into bodies. Can be seen in Milky Way with naked eve. 
[Figures: two line drawings, captioned as follows. "The solar 
system." "The sun."] 

4 


A B C's of Science 

 CHAPTER III


THE SOLAR SYSTEM 

1. The Solar System is better known to us, as the earth on which we 
flourish belongs to it. 
2. The System is comprised of one sun (star), eight major planets, 
Mercury, Venus, Earth, and one satellite, Mars and two satellites, Jupiter 
and seven satellites, Saturn, its rings and ten satellites, Uranus and four 
satellites, Neptune and one satellite, and some 600 planetoids, varying in 
size from 600 miles in diameter to mere rocks. 
3. The sun's diameter is 866,000 miles. Rotates every 606 hours. 
The length of time its current carries the sun over its orbit is unknown. 
The sun remains a melted mass; its vibration is maintained; has but little 
vapor and its theme reflected on the surface of its obsequious attendants 
which gives them heat and light. 
Dark spots caused by vapor becoming concentrated to the sun's surface; 
these spots change. 

4. Mercury, the smallest major planet, also the closest to the sun. It is 
carried over its orbit about 36,000,000 miles from the sun, which requires 
88 days to complete its course, and rotates once every 24 hours and 5 
minutes. Its diameter is 3,000 miles and it has a suitable amount of vapor 
for animals and vegetables to flourish. 
5. Venus has the brightest lustre of our planets which is caused from 
enormous amount of vapor. It is carried over its orbit at about 
67,000,000 miles from the sun, which requires 224 7/10 days to complete 
its course. Rotates once every 23 hours and 21 minutes. Diameter, 7,700 
miles. 
6. The earth is carried over its orbit; main distance being 93,000,000 
miles from the sun, which requires one year to complete its course, which 
is 680,000,000 miles: 
MILES Earth's 
diameter 8,000 Greater or equatorial 
7,925 Less or polar 7,899 

5


A B C's of Science 

Difference on comparison 26 

The earth rotates once every 23 hours, 56 minutes, and 4 seconds; has 
one satellite, which is carried over its orbit at a distance of 238,850 miles 
from the earth. Its diameter is 2,160 miles. The moon completes its 
orbit in 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, and 2 seconds. Its currents touch 
the earth and cause the tide; also affects some plants of the phenomena 
verita; these plants are also affected by the sun. 

Many years after the earth's material began to flourish, a small body 
(whose crust was cooled) came in contact with the earth; this caused the 
earth's crust to crack almost from pole to pole and formed North and South 
America. The eruptions in Europe, Asia, and Africa were greatly 
scattered. Australian soil is deficient in phosphorus, which shows it is 
foreign and represents the small body which did not entirely bury itself. 
This caused some of the earth's land surface to be below the sea level; also 
caused the earth's axis to change at a very slow rate of about 77 yards per 
year. This will require many thousands of years for the North Pole to 
become the South Pole. For many years the Polar star appeared "fixed" 
at the earth's north axis. 

7. Mars is carried around the sun by its planet current at a distance of 
140,000,000 miles, which requires 687 days, and rotates every 24 hours, 
37 minutes, and 22 1/2 seconds. Diameter, 4,200 miles. Mars has two 
satellites and is not abundant in vapor which causes its reddish appearance, 
therefore vegetation and animals are scanty. 
8. Jupiter is the largest major planet. It makes a great jump from the 
sun of 483,000,000 miles, carried by its planet current to complete its orbit 
in 12 years. Rotates every 9 hours, 55 minutes, and 37 seconds. 
Diameter, 88,000 miles; has seven satellites. The climate has a very even 
temperature due to its fast rotation. 
9. Saturn, the beauty of the skies, carried by its planet current around 
the sun at its main distance of 883,000,000 miles (a greater distance of 
400,000,000 miles than Jupiter) which requires about 29 1/2 years. Rotates 
once every 10 hours, 14 minutes, and 23 seconds. Diameter, 75,000 
miles. It has ten satellites and three rings of unconcentrated material. 
The cape ring is about 9,000 miles across, the other two about 16,000 each. 
6 


A B C's of Science 

Diameter of rings about 170,000 miles, which makes the rings very close 
to the surface. 

10. Uranus is carried by its planet current around the sun at a great 
distance of 1,778,000,000 miles, which requires about 84 years. Rate of 
rotation unknown. Diameter, 31,000 miles. It has four satellites. 
11. Neptune is the farthest from the sun. Its main distance being 
2,792,000,000 miles; carried by its planet current over its orbit once in 164 
years, 9 months. Diameter, 37,000 miles. Period of rotation unknown. 
Has one satellite. At Neptune we haven't taken a step but our next 
neighbor is across the divide. Let us have a fairy dream and travel from 
the sun to Neptune in a straight or direct course at the rate of 1,000,000 
miles an hour; it would take us 116 1/3 days to reach Neptune. 
[Figure: Line drawing, captioned "The solar system."] 

7 


A B C's of Science 

 CHAPTER IV 

ACROSS THE DIVIDE 

1. Crossing the divide (Abyss) we encounter other systems of about 
25,000,000,000, or the first magnitude. Our most powerful glass reaches 
the 16th. 
Magnitude is very uneven and irregular, and beyond this there is no 
end. 

2. Many constellations have more than one sun, while others are 
double, quadruple, and multiple. It is estimated a brilliant star, and can 
be seen; of these over a million have been catalogued and only about 25 
whose distance have been measured. 
8


A B C's of Science 

CHAPTER V 

FLOURISHMENT OF THE EARTH 

1. The earth reached its state of concentration, and the vapor in great 
clouds enveloped the heavier substance. The earth being heaved up by 
volcanoes (caused by the vapor coming in contact with the heated 
material); as the vapor reached its state, rain fell on the earth crust, and 
thus rivers, lakes, and oceans were formed. 
2. Here animal and vegetable matter began to flourish. 
3. Great deposits of protoplasm became concentrated over the earth's 
surface; from the deposits sprang all kinds of vegetables and animals that 
flourish, and many more families than inhabit the earth to-day became 
extinct. 
4. Vegetable matter began to flourish as its semen became 
concentrated, likewise animal matter. (This takes place to-day in 
different ways, principally in Marine varites. See Chap. I, par. 6.) 
5. Reproductions in all families that flourish; some families mix and 
their offspring will not reproduce. (Life cannot be destroyed, but 
flourishment can.) 
6. Man came from deposits of protoplasm (semen) as is produced for 
reproduction of man to-day. The deposits were of different kinds; each 
deposit brought forth its own branch of humanity, these branches being of 
different type and tongue. Later the tongue of one branch became 
learned by the other. From the different original tongues will give us a 
good estimate of deposits in number. 
7. Babies were nourished in the protoplasm deposits the same as they 
are in their mother's womb. This nourishment came from the abundance 
of albumen which accompanied the semen in concentrating. As the 
babies matured they broke the crust of the deposit of protoplasm and put 
forth their heads and breathed the air; their bodies still remained in the 
albumen until they gained strength to feed themselves on the albumen. 
Here the babies broke the cord (navel cord) that brought nourishment into 
their bodies, as in the womb of a mother, and crawled around over the 
9 


A B C's of Science 

crust of the deposit where they came, feeding on its crust by putting it into 
their mouths. The babe has not forgotten it yet, as everything he gets that 
he can handle goes to his mouth. He learned to walk and talk to his 
brothers and sisters, and composed a language of their own. Here 
manhood and womanhood is reached. 

8. All animals came in like manner, but without a fluent language. 
9.Vegetable matter flourished and the earth is inhabited. All bodies that 
have atmosphere are inhabited. Atmosphere is vaporized protoplasm. 

10. Ten of the principal materials that produce flourishment are carbon, 
hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, potassium, nitrogen, sulphur, calcium, iron 
and magnesium; protoplasm contains everything; chemists have not been 
able to determine and classify protoplasm. (See Chap. I, par. 7.) 
11. Humanity varied much in size. The giant tribe (such as the 
petrified Cardiff Giant) has long been extinct. Men of this type weighed 
500 pounds and more, measured nearly 12 feet in height, while our 
midgets measure under 2 feet. 
12. Hermaphrodites exist in all material that flourishes. 
Malformation. 
10 


A B C's of Science 

 CHAPTER VI 

ANIMAL MAGNETISM 

1. Every animal has its own magnetism which is its source of strength 
and intelligence. The glands, nerves, and ducts are batteries, ducts and 
glands storage batteries, the nerves motive and sensation (or intelligence). 
The brain is the principal battery of sensation (or intelligence), while the 
heart is the principal motive battery. 
2. The child begins to train himself to make use of his limbs, first by 
swinging his arms and legs, second by creeping, third by walking. Note a 
child feeding itself, how unsteady he is in getting his food to his mouth; 
sometimes his spoon misses his mouth and the food is spilled, for which 
he usually receives a slap, although he has displayed all his energy in 
getting his food in his mouth. Next we find him a trained athlete and 
skilled laborer, capable of applying himself to most anything he cares to 
do. 
3. But little attention is paid to the training of animal magnetism. 
Any one with nerves in his teeth can concentrate magnetism in the teeth, 
so it can be easily felt, also the lips; by training the magnetism it can be 
concentrated in any part of the body. This takes constant practice and 
could be used when one has any disability by concentrating the magnetism 
in the disabled part, causing the blood to circulate more freely at the point 
where the magnetism is concentrated, and thus improving the disabled part. 
The osteologist does this by massage, the real faith cure man by 
concentrating his magnetism on the patient, the practitioner uses medicine 
and drugs, each having their own magnetism, etc. Accordingly many 
diseases are contagious by people becoming inoculated by mild 
magnetism which comes from some kind of matter. (See Chap. I, par. 7.) 
4. The hypnotist or mesmerist gains control of his opponents through 
animal magnetism and controls every movement. The nerves cease to act 
and the hypnotist is boss. The patient can be made to exert great strength 
and pass dangerous points without falling. A hypnotist or mesmerist is 
invariably in poor health and flesh. This is caused by the over-taxation 
11


A B C's of Science 

of his own nerves and ducts. 

6. Animal magnetism can he used like wireless telegraphy. Miss 
Helen Kellar is one of the best known for telepathy. She was born blind, 
also deaf and dumb. She is a great linguist and well educated. 
7. The dumb animals in their wild state use telepathy much when 
encountering danger; their keen scent of the deer, horse, etc., enables them 
to determine the direction of the enemy. 
8. Predestination is cultivated and in most instances comes true. I 
observed this in the case of William McKinley, martyred President of the 
United States of America, who said he wanted to follow in the footsteps of 
James A. Garfield, also martyred President. Let us see how nearly he 
came following in his footsteps: Born in the same locality, President of 
the same country, each supported a platform of good currency, each 
assassinated in the same month, and in the seat of the Presidency. Both 
died a lingering death; the difference in the length of time of their 
flourishment was 8 months and 7 days. 
[Figures: Photographs of William McKinley and James A. 
Garfield.] 

9. Next observe the old in their feebleness and we see these well 
trained hands tremble; the gland ducts and nerves are withering, the 
animal magnetism is weakening, which renders them childish . 
10. The ducts, glands, and nerves throw off their magnetism in many 
different ways, in exertion, fright, fear, anguish, discontent, happiness, 
kindness, loveliness, desire, etc. 
Dr. T. B. Robertson discovered that Tethelin (located in the pituitary 
body at the base of the brain) produces the growth of the body. 

12 


A B C's of Science 

 CHAPTER VII 

MISCELLANEOUS 

1. Lightning is caused by the friction of vapor, which is at a suitable 
temperature. Thus two or more currents of air coming together will 
cause lightning, as the friction concentrates the electricity, and as there is 
no conductor the heavy voltage flies usually toward the nearest conductor. 
This voltage is so great that it explodes the air. The air coming together 
again produces a great vibration, called thunder. 
2. Aurora Borealis. The outer circle around the earth represents 
atmosphere. The sun current carries it far from the earth's surface. At the 
north, when the sun's reflection strikes the earth's crust in such a manner, 
its reflection will be seen in the atmosphere at a great height, called 
Northern Lights. This is mostly seen in November, December, and 
January. 
[Figure: Uncaptioned line drawing (accompanying the paragraph 
above) of the Earth's orbit about the sun.] 

3. The museum of Alexandria was established about 400 years B.C., 
for the purpose of restoring science that had been lost thousands of years 
before. 
The cultivation of knowledge by experiment, observation, and 
mathematical discussions: this was the birth of a science of to-day. The 
library contained many thousands of volumes of books, but was destroyed 
by Cyril; a girl in charge of the library by the name of Hypatia was 
brutally killed and the flesh was scraped from her bones with sea shells. 
This occurred in 414 A.D. 

Alexander died at Babylon 323 B.C. 

China, Mesopotamia, and India had made astronomical observations at 
this early date. Most of these learnings were destroyed. Brono, Isaac 
Newton, Brably, and some few others, promoted science by their 
discoveries of what is to-day. "Good Will to man." 

13


