




 
BOOK EIGHTH.--THE WICKED POOR MAN
CHAPTER II 

　　TREASURE TROVE
　　Marius had not left the Gorbeau house.
　　He paid no attention to any one there.
　　At that epoch, to tell the truth, there were no other inhabitants in the house, except himself and those Jondrettes whose rent he had once paid, without, moreover, ever having spoken to either father, mother, or daughters.
　　The other lodgers had moved away or had died, or had been turned out in default of payment.
　　One day during that winter, the sun had shown itself a little in the afternoon, but it was the 2d of February, that ancient Candlemas day whose treacherous sun, the precursor of a six weeks' cold spell, inspired Mathieu Laensberg with these two lines, which have with justice remained classic:-- 
　　 Qu'il luise ou qu'il luiserne, 
　　 L'ours rentre dans en sa caverne.[26]
　　[26] Whether the sun shines brightly or dim, the bear returns to his cave.
　　Marius had just emerged from his:
　　night was falling.
　　It was the hour for his dinner; for he had been obliged to take to dining again, alas! oh, infirmities of ideal passions!
　　He had just crossed his threshold, where Ma'am Bougon was sweeping at the moment, as she uttered this memorable monologue:--
　　"What is there that is cheap now?
　　Everything is dear.
　　There is nothing in the world that is cheap except trouble; you can get that for nothing, the trouble of the world!"
　　Marius slowly ascended the boulevard towards the barrier, in order to reach the Rue Saint-Jacques. He was walking along with drooping head.
　　All at once, he felt some one elbow him in the dusk; he wheeled round, and saw two young girls clad in rags, the one tall and slim, the other a little shorter, who were passing rapidly, all out of breath, in terror, and with the appearance of fleeing; they had been coming to meet him, had not seen him, and had jostled him as they passed. Through the twilight, Marius could distinguish their livid faces, their wild heads, their dishevelled hair, their hideous bonnets, their ragged petticoats, and their bare feet.
　　They were talking as they ran.
　　The taller said in a very low voice:--
　　"The bobbies have come.
　　They came near nabbing me at the half-circle." The other answered:
　　"I saw them.
　　I bolted, bolted, bolted!"
　　Through this repulsive slang, Marius understood that gendarmes or the police had come near apprehending these two children, and that the latter had escaped.
　　They plunged among the trees of the boulevard behind him, and there created, for a few minutes, in the gloom, a sort of vague white spot, then disappeared.
　　Marius had halted for a moment.
　　He was about to pursue his way, when his eye lighted on a little grayish package lying on the ground at his feet.
　　He stooped and picked it up.
　　It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers.
　　"Good," he said to himself, "those unhappy girls dropped it."
　　He retraced his steps, he called, he did not find them; he reflected that they must already be far away, put the package in his pocket, and went off to dine.
　　On the way, he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard, a child's coffin, covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs, and illuminated by a candle.
　　The two girls of the twilight recurred to his mind.
　　"Poor mothers!" he thought.
　　"There is one thing sadder than to see one's children die; it is to see them leading an evil life."
　　Then those shadows which had varied his melancholy vanished from his thoughts, and he fell back once more into his habitual preoccupations.
　　He fell to thinking once more of his six months of love and happiness in the open air and the broad daylight, beneath the beautiful trees of Luxembourg.
　　"How gloomy my life has become!" he said to himself.
　　"Young girls are always appearing to me, only formerly they were angels and now they are ghouls."



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  