




 
BOOK FIRST.--A FEW PAGES OF HISTORY
CHAPTER I 

　　WELL CUT 
　　1831 and 1832, the two years which are immediately connected with the Revolution of July, form one of the most peculiar and striking moments of history.
　　These two years rise like two mountains midway between those which precede and those which follow them.
　　They have a revolutionary grandeur.
　　Precipices are to be distinguished there. The social masses, the very assizes of civilization, the solid group of superposed and adhering interests, the century-old profiles of the ancient French formation, appear and disappear in them every instant, athwart the storm clouds of systems, of passions, and of theories. These appearances and disappearances have been designated as movement and resistance.
　　At intervals, truth, that daylight of the human soul, can be descried shining there.
　　This remarkable epoch is decidedly circumscribed and is beginning to be sufficiently distant from us to allow of our grasping the principal lines even at the present day.
　　We shall make the attempt.
　　The Restoration had been one of those intermediate phases, hard to define, in which there is fatigue, buzzing, murmurs, sleep, tumult, and which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a halting-place.
　　These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to convert them to profit.
　　In the beginning, the nation asks nothing but repose; it thirsts for but one thing, peace; it has but one ambition, to be small.
　　Which is the translation of remaining tranquil. Of great events, great hazards, great adventures, great men, thank God, we have seen enough, we have them heaped higher than our heads.
　　We would exchange Caesar for Prusias, and Napoleon for the King of Yvetot. "What a good little king was he!"
　　We have marched since daybreak, we have reached the evening of a long and toilsome day; we have made our first change with Mirabeau, the second with Robespierre, the third with Bonaparte; we are worn out.
　　Each one demands a bed.
　　Devotion which is weary, heroism which has grown old, ambitions which are sated, fortunes which are made, seek, demand, implore, solicit, what?
　　A shelter.
　　They have it.
　　They take possession of peace, of tranquillity, of leisure; behold, they are content.
　　But, at the same time certain facts arise, compel recognition, and knock at the door in their turn.
　　These facts are the products of revolutions and wars, they are, they exist, they have the right to install themselves in society, and they do install themselves therein; and most of the time, facts are the stewards of the household and fouriers[32] who do nothing but prepare lodgings for principles.
　　 [32] In olden times, fouriers were the officials who preceded the Court and allotted the lodgings.
　　 This, then, is what appears to philosophical politicians:--
　　At the same time that weary men demand repose, accomplished facts demand guarantees.
　　Guarantees are the same to facts that repose is to men.
　　This is what England demanded of the Stuarts after the Protector; this is what France demanded of the Bourbons after the Empire.
　　These guarantees are a necessity of the times.
　　They must be accorded. Princes "grant" them, but in reality, it is the force of things which gives them.
　　A profound truth, and one useful to know, which the Stuarts did not suspect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a glimpse of in 1814.
　　The predestined family, which returned to France when Napoleon fell, had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed, and that what it had bestowed it could take back again; that the House of Bourbon possessed the right divine, that France possessed nothing, and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII. was merely a branch of the right divine, was detached by the House of Bourbon and graciously given to the people until such day as it should please the King to reassume it.
　　Still, the House of Bourbon should have felt, from the displeasure created by the gift, that it did not come from it.
　　This house was churlish to the nineteenth century.
　　It put on an ill-tempered look at every development of the nation.
　　To make use of a trivial word, that is to say, of a popular and a true word, it looked glum.
　　The people saw this.
　　It thought it possessed strength because the Empire had been carried away before it like a theatrical stage-setting. It did not perceive that it had, itself, been brought in in the same fashion.
　　It did not perceive that it also lay in that hand which had removed Napoleon.
　　It thought that it had roots, because it was the past.
　　It was mistaken; it formed a part of the past, but the whole past was France. The roots of French society were not fixed in the Bourbons, but in the nations.
　　These obscure and lively roots constituted, not the right of a family, but the history of a people. They were everywhere, except under the throne.
　　The House of Bourbon was to France the illustrious and bleeding knot in her history, but was no longer the principal element of her destiny, and the necessary base of her politics.
　　She could get along without the Bourbons; she had done without them for two and twenty years; there had been a break of continuity; they did not suspect the fact. And how should they have suspected it, they who fancied that Louis XVII. reigned on the 9th of Thermidor, and that Louis XVIII.
　　was reigning at the battle of Marengo?
　　Never, since the origin of history, had princes been so blind in the presence of facts and the portion of divine authority which facts contain and promulgate.
　　Never had that pretension here below which is called the right of kings denied to such a point the right from on high.
　　A capital error which led this family to lay its hand once more on the guarantees "granted" in 1814, on the concessions, as it termed them.
　　Sad.
　　A sad thing!
　　What it termed its concessions were our conquests; what it termed our encroachments were our rights.
　　When the hour seemed to it to have come, the Restoration, supposing itself victorious over Bonaparte and well-rooted in the country, that is to say, believing itself to be strong and deep, abruptly decided on its plan of action, and risked its stroke. One morning it drew itself up before the face of France, and, elevating its voice, it contested the collective title and the individual right of the nation to sovereignty, of the citizen to liberty. In other words, it denied to the nation that which made it a nation, and to the citizen that which made him a citizen.
　　This is the foundation of those famous acts which are called the ordinances of July.
　　The Restoration fell.
　　It fell justly.
　　But, we admit, it had not been absolutely hostile to all forms of progress.
　　Great things had been accomplished, with it alongside.
　　Under the Restoration, the nation had grown accustomed to calm discussion, which had been lacking under the Republic, and to grandeur in peace, which had been wanting under the Empire.
　　France free and strong had offered an encouraging spectacle to the other peoples of Europe. The Revolution had had the word under Robespierre; the cannon had had the word under Bonaparte; it was under Louis XVIII. and Charles X. that it was the turn of intelligence to have the word.
　　The wind ceased, the torch was lighted once more. On the lofty heights, the pure light of mind could be seen flickering. A magnificent, useful, and charming spectacle.
　　For a space of fifteen years, those great principles which are so old for the thinker, so new for the statesman, could be seen at work in perfect peace, on the public square; equality before the law, liberty of conscience, liberty of speech, liberty of the press, the accessibility of all aptitudes to all functions.
　　Thus it proceeded until 1830. The Bourbons were an instrument of civilization which broke in the hands of Providence.
　　The fall of the Bourbons was full of grandeur, not on their side, but on the side of the nation.
　　They quitted the throne with gravity, but without authority; their descent into the night was not one of those solemn disappearances which leave a sombre emotion in history; it was neither the spectral calm of Charles I., nor the eagle scream of Napoleon.
　　They departed, that is all.
　　They laid down the crown, and retained no aureole.
　　They were worthy, but they were not august. They lacked, in a certain measure, the majesty of their misfortune. Charles X. during the voyage from Cherbourg, causing a round table to be cut over into a square table, appeared to be more anxious about imperilled etiquette than about the crumbling monarchy. This diminution saddened devoted men who loved their persons, and serious men who honored their race.
　　The populace was admirable.
　　The nation, attacked one morning with weapons, by a sort of royal insurrection, felt itself in the possession of so much force that it did not go into a rage.
　　It defended itself, restrained itself, restored things to their places, the government to law, the Bourbons to exile, alas! and then halted!
　　It took the old king Charles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV.
　　and set him gently on the ground. It touched the royal personages only with sadness and precaution. It was not one man, it was not a few men, it was France, France entire, France victorious and intoxicated with her victory, who seemed to be coming to herself, and who put into practice, before the eyes of the whole world, these grave words of Guillaume du Vair after the day of the Barricades:--
　　"It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of the great, and to spring, like a bird from bough to bough, from an afflicted fortune to a flourishing one, to show themselves harsh towards their Prince in his adversity; but as for me, the fortune of my Kings and especially of my afflicted Kings, will always be venerable to me."
　　The Bourbons carried away with them respect, but not regret. As we have just stated, their misfortune was greater than they were. They faded out in the horizon.
　　The Revolution of July instantly had friends and enemies throughout the entire world.
　　The first rushed toward her with joy and enthusiasm, the others turned away, each according to his nature.
　　At the first blush, the princes of Europe, the owls of this dawn, shut their eyes, wounded and stupefied, and only opened them to threaten. A fright which can be comprehended, a wrath which can be pardoned. This strange revolution had hardly produced a shock; it had not even paid to vanquished royalty the honor of treating it as an enemy, and of shedding its blood.
　　In the eyes of despotic governments, who are always interested in having liberty calumniate itself, the Revolution of July committed the fault of being formidable and of remaining gentle.
　　Nothing, however, was attempted or plotted against it.
　　The most discontented, the most irritated, the most trembling, saluted it; whatever our egotism and our rancor may be, a mysterious respect springs from events in which we are sensible of the collaboration of some one who is working above man.
　　The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact. A thing which is full of splendor.
　　Right overthrowing the fact.
　　Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of 1830, hence, also, its mildness.
　　Right triumphant has no need of being violent.
　　Right is the just and the true.
　　The property of right is to remain eternally beautiful and pure. The fact, even when most necessary to all appearances, even when most thoroughly accepted by contemporaries, if it exist only as a fact, and if it contain only too little of right, or none at all, is infallibly destined to become, in the course of time, deformed, impure, perhaps, even monstrous.
　　If one desires to learn at one blow, to what degree of hideousness the fact can attain, viewed at the distance of centuries, let him look at Machiavelli.
　　Machiavelli is not an evil genius, nor a demon, nor a miserable and cowardly writer; he is nothing but the fact.
　　And he is not only the Italian fact; he is the European fact, the fact of the sixteenth century. He seems hideous, and so he is, in the presence of the moral idea of the nineteenth.
　　This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the origin of society.
　　To terminate this duel, to amalgamate the pure idea with the humane reality, to cause right to penetrate pacifically into the fact and the fact into right, that is the task of sages.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  