




 
BOOK FOURTEENTH.--THE GRANDEURS OF DESPAIR
CHAPTER III 

　　GAVROCHE WOULD HAVE DONE BETTER TO ACCEPT ENJOLRAS' CARBINE
　　 They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup's over Father Mabeuf. Six men made a litter of their guns; on this they laid the body, and bore it, with bared heads, with solemn slowness, to the large table in the tap-room.
　　These men, wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which they were engaged, thought no more of the perilous situation in which they stood.
　　When the corpse passed near Javert, who was still impassive, Enjolras said to the spy:--
　　"It will be your turn presently!"
　　During all this time, Little Gavroche, who alone had not quitted his post, but had remained on guard, thought he espied some men stealthily approaching the barricade.
　　All at once he shouted:--
　　"Look out!"
　　Courfeyrac, Enjolras, Jean Prouvaire, Combeferre, Joly, Bahorel, Bossuet, and all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop. It was almost too late.
　　They saw a glistening density of bayonets undulating above the barricade.
　　Municipal guards of lofty stature were making their way in, some striding over the omnibus, others through the cut, thrusting before them the urchin, who retreated, but did not flee.
　　The moment was critical.
　　It was that first, redoubtable moment of inundation, when the stream rises to the level of the levee and when the water begins to filter through the fissures of dike. A second more and the barricade would have been taken.
　　Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering, and killed him on the spot with a blow from his gun; the second killed Bahorel with a blow from his bayonet.
　　Another had already overthrown Courfeyrac, who was shouting:
　　"Follow me!"
　　The largest of all, a sort of colossus, marched on Gavroche with his bayonet fixed. The urchin took in his arms Javert's immense gun, levelled it resolutely at the giant, and fired.
　　No discharge followed. Javert's gun was not loaded.
　　The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the child.
　　Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche, the gun slipped from the soldier's grasp, a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the centre of the forehead, and he fell over on his back. A second bullet struck the other guard, who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast, and laid him low on the pavement.
　　This was the work of Marius, who had just entered the barricade.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  