




 
BOOK SEVENTH.--THE LAST DRAUGHT FROM THE CUP
CHAPTER I(1) 

　　THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN 
　　The days that follow weddings are solitary.
　　People respect the meditations of the happy pair.
　　And also, their tardy slumbers, to some degree.
　　The tumult of visits and congratulations only begins later on.
　　On the morning of the 17th of February, it was a little past midday when Basque, with napkin and feather-duster under his arm, busy in setting his antechamber to rights, heard a light tap at the door.
　　There had been no ring, which was discreet on such a day. Basque opened the door, and beheld M. Fauchelevent.
　　He introduced him into the drawing-room, still encumbered and topsy-turvy, and which bore the air of a field of battle after the joys of the preceding evening.
　　"Dame, sir," remarked Basque, "we all woke up late."
　　"Is your master up?" asked Jean Valjean.
　　"How is Monsieur's arm?" replied Basque.
　　"Better.
　　Is your master up?"
　　"Which one? the old one or the new one?"
　　"Monsieur Pontmercy."
　　"Monsieur le Baron," said Basque, drawing himself up.
　　A man is a Baron most of all to his servants.
　　He counts for something with them; they are what a philosopher would call, bespattered with the title, and that flatters them.
　　Marius, be it said in passing, a militant republican as he had proved, was now a Baron in spite of himself.
　　A small revolution had taken place in the family in connection with this title.
　　It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it, and Marius who detached himself from it. But Colonel Pontmercy had written:
　　"My son will bear my title." Marius obeyed.
　　And then, Cosette, in whom the woman was beginning to dawn, was delighted to be a Baroness.
　　"Monsieur le Baron?" repeated Basque.
　　"I will go and see. I will tell him that M. Fauchelevent is here."
　　"No. Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes to speak to him in private, and mention no name."
　　"Ah!" ejaculated Basque.
　　"I wish to surprise him."
　　"Ah!" ejaculated Basque once more, emitting his second "ah!" as an explanation of the first.
　　And he left the room.
　　Jean Valjean remained alone.
　　The drawing-room, as we have just said, was in great disorder. It seemed as though, by lending an air, one might still hear the vague noise of the wedding.
　　On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which had fallen from garlands and head-dresses. The wax candles, burned to stumps, added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the chandeliers.
　　Not a single piece of furniture was in its place. In the corners, three or four arm-chairs, drawn close together in a circle, had the appearance of continuing a conversation. The whole effect was cheerful.
　　A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast.
　　It has been a happy thing.
　　On the chairs in disarray, among those fading flowers, beneath those extinct lights, people have thought of joy.
　　The sun had succeeded to the chandelier, and made its way gayly into the drawing-room.
　　Several minutes elapsed.
　　Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spot where Basque had left him.
　　He was very pale.
　　His eyes were hollow, and so sunken in his head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared in their orbits.
　　His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has been up all night.
　　The elbows were whitened with the down which the friction of cloth against linen leaves behind it.
　　Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at his feet by the sun.
　　There came a sound at the door, and he raised his eyes.
　　Marius entered, his head well up, his mouth smiling, an indescribable light on his countenance, his brow expanded, his eyes triumphant. He had not slept either.
　　"It is you, father!" he exclaimed, on catching sight of Jean Valjean; "that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air!
　　But you have come too early.
　　It is only half past twelve.
　　Cosette is asleep."
　　That word:
　　"Father," said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius, signified: supreme felicity.
　　There had always existed, as the reader knows, a lofty wall, a coldness and a constraint between them; ice which must be broken or melted.
　　Marius had reached that point of intoxication when the wall was lowered, when the ice dissolved, and when M. Fauchelevent was to him, as to Cosette, a father.
　　He continued:
　　his words poured forth, as is the peculiarity of divine paroxysms of joy.
　　"How glad I am to see you!
　　If you only knew how we missed you yesterday! Good morning, father.
　　How is your hand?
　　Better, is it not?"
　　And, satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself, he pursued:
　　"We have both been talking about you.
　　Cosette loves you so dearly! You must not forget that you have a chamber here, We want nothing more to do with the Rue de l'Homme Arme.
　　We will have no more of it at all. How could you go to live in a street like that, which is sickly, which is disagreeable, which is ugly, which has a barrier at one end, where one is cold, and into which one cannot enter?
　　You are to come and install yourself here.
　　And this very day.
　　Or you will have to deal with Cosette.
　　She means to lead us all by the nose, I warn you. You have your own chamber here, it is close to ours, it opens on the garden; the trouble with the clock has been attended to, the bed is made, it is all ready, you have only to take possession of it. Near your bed Cosette has placed a huge, old, easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and she has said to it:
　　`Stretch out your arms to him.'
　　A nightingale comes to the clump of acacias opposite your windows, every spring.
　　In two months more you will have it. You will have its nest on your left and ours on your right.
　　By night it will sing, and by day Cosette will prattle.
　　Your chamber faces due South.
　　Cosette will arrange your books for you, your Voyages of Captain Cook and the other,--Vancouver's and all your affairs. I believe that there is a little valise to which you are attached, I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that.
　　You have conquered my grandfather, you suit him.
　　We will live together.
　　Do you play whist? you will overwhelm my grandfather with delight if you play whist.
　　It is you who shall take Cosette to walk on the days when I am at the courts, you shall give her your arm, you know, as you used to, in the Luxembourg.
　　We are absolutely resolved to be happy.
　　And you shall be included in it, in our happiness, do you hear, father?
　　Come, will you breakfast with us to-day?"
　　"Sir," said Jean Valjean, "I have something to say to you. I am an ex-convict."
　　The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped, as well in the case of the mind as in that of the ear.
　　These words: "I am an ex-convict," proceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and entering the ear of Marius overshot the possible.
　　It seemed to him that something had just been said to him; but he did not know what. He stood with his mouth wide open.
　　Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful. Wholly absorbed in his own dazzled state, he had not, up to that moment, observed the other man's terrible pallor.
　　Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm, unrolled the linen from around his hand, bared his thumb and showed it to Marius.
　　"There is nothing the matter with my hand," said he.
　　Marius looked at the thumb.
　　"There has not been anything the matter with it," went on Jean Valjean.
　　There was, in fact, no trace of any injury.
　　Jean Valjean continued:
　　"It was fitting that I should be absent from your marriage. I absented myself as much as was in my power.
　　So I invented this injury in order that I might not commit a forgery, that I might not introduce a flaw into the marriage documents, in order that I might escape from signing."
　　Marius stammered.
　　"What is the meaning of this?"
　　"The meaning of it is," replied Jean Valjean, "that I have been in the galleys."
　　"You are driving me mad!" exclaimed Marius in terror.
　　"Monsieur Pontmercy," said Jean Valjean, "I was nineteen years in the galleys.
　　For theft.
　　Then, I was condemned for life for theft, for a second offence.
　　At the present moment, I have broken my ban."
　　In vain did Marius recoil before the reality, refuse the fact, resist the evidence, he was forced to give way.
　　He began to understand, and, as always happens in such cases, he understood too much. An inward shudder of hideous enlightenment flashed through him; an idea which made him quiver traversed his mind.
　　He caught a glimpse of a wretched destiny for himself in the future.
　　"Say all, say all!" he cried.
　　"You are Cosette's father!"
　　And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribable horror.
　　Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that he seemed to grow even to the ceiling.
　　"It is necessary that you should believe me here, sir; although our oath to others may not be received in law . . ."
　　Here he paused, then, with a sort of sovereign and sepulchral authority, he added, articulating slowly, and emphasizing the syllables:
　　". . . You will believe me.
　　I the father of Cosette! before God, no. Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy, I am a peasant of Faverolles. I earned my living by pruning trees.
　　My name is not Fauchelevent, but Jean Valjean.
　　I am not related to Cosette.
　　Reassure yourself."
　　Marius stammered:
　　"Who will prove that to me?"
　　"I. Since I tell you so."
　　Marius looked at the man.
　　He was melancholy yet tranquil.
　　No lie could proceed from such a calm.
　　That which is icy is sincere. The truth could be felt in that chill of the tomb.
　　"I believe you," said Marius.
　　Jean Valjean bent his head, as though taking note of this, and continued:
　　"What am I to Cosette?
　　A passer-by. Ten years ago, I did not know that she was in existence.
　　I love her, it is true.
　　One loves a child whom one has seen when very young, being old oneself.
　　When one is old, one feels oneself a grandfather towards all little children. You may, it seems to me, suppose that I have something which resembles a heart.
　　She was an orphan.
　　Without either father or mother. She needed me.
　　That is why I began to love her.
　　Children are so weak that the first comer, even a man like me, can become their protector.
　　I have fulfilled this duty towards Cosette. I do not think that so slight a thing can be called a good action; but if it be a good action, well, say that I have done it. Register this attenuating circumstance.
　　To-day, Cosette passes out of my life; our two roads part.
　　Henceforth, I can do nothing for her.
　　She is Madame Pontmercy.
　　Her providence has changed. And Cosette gains by the change.
　　All is well.
　　As for the six hundred thousand francs, you do not mention them to me, but I forestall your thought, they are a deposit.
　　How did that deposit come into my hands?
　　What does that matter?
　　I restore the deposit. Nothing more can be demanded of me.
　　I complete the restitution by announcing my true name.
　　That concerns me.
　　I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am."
　　And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face.
　　All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent. Certain gusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls.
　　We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us is dispersed; we say the first things that occur to us, which are not always precisely those which should be said. There are sudden revelations which one cannot bear, and which intoxicate like baleful wine.
　　Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presented itself to him, to the point of addressing that man almost like a person who was angry with him for this avowal.
　　"But why," he exclaimed, "do you tell me all this?
　　Who forces you to do so?
　　You could have kept your secret to yourself. You are neither denounced, nor tracked nor pursued.
　　You have a reason for wantonly making such a revelation.
　　Conclude.
　　There is something more.
　　In what connection do you make this confession? What is your motive?"
　　"My motive?" replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one would have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius. "From what motive, in fact, has this convict just said `I am a convict'? Well, yes! the motive is strange.
　　It is out of honesty. Stay, the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart, which keeps me fast.
　　It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly solid.
　　All life falls in ruin around one; one resists.
　　Had I been able to tear out that thread, to break it, to undo the knot or to cut it, to go far away, I should have been safe. I had only to go away; there are diligences in the Rue Bouloy; you are happy; I am going.
　　I have tried to break that thread, I have jerked at it, it would not break, I tore my heart with it. Then I said:
　　`I cannot live anywhere else than here.'
　　I must stay. Well, yes, you are right, I am a fool, why not simply remain here? You offer me a chamber in this house, Madame Pontmercy is sincerely attached to me, she said to the arm-chair: `Stretch out your arms to him,' your grandfather demands nothing better than to have me, I suit him, we shall live together, and take our meals in common, I shall give Cosette my arm . . . Madame Pontmercy, excuse me, it is a habit, we shall have but one roof, one table, one fire, the same chimney-corner in winter, the same promenade in summer, that is joy, that is happiness, that is everything.
　　We shall live as one family. One family!"
　　At that word, Jean Valjean became wild.
　　He folded his arms, glared at the floor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abyss therein, and his voice suddenly rose in thundering tones:
　　"As one family!
　　No. I belong to no family.
　　I do not belong to yours. I do not belong to any family of men.
　　In houses where people are among themselves, I am superfluous.
　　There are families, but there is nothing of the sort for me.
　　I am an unlucky wretch; I am left outside.
　　Did I have a father and mother?
　　I almost doubt it. On the day when I gave that child in marriage, all came to an end. I have seen her happy, and that she is with a man whom she loves, and that there exists here a kind old man, a household of two angels, and all joys in that house, and that it was well, I said to myself: `Enter thou not.'
　　I could have lied, it is true, have deceived you all, and remained Monsieur Fauchelevent.
　　So long as it was for her, I could lie; but now it would be for myself, and I must not.
　　It was sufficient for me to hold my peace, it is true, and all would go on. You ask me what has forced me to speak? a very odd thing; my conscience. To hold my peace was very easy, however.
　　I passed the night in trying to persuade myself to it; you questioned me, and what I have just said to you is so extraordinary that you have the right to do it; well, yes, I have passed the night in alleging reasons to myself, and I gave myself very good reasons, I have done what I could. But there are two things in which I have not succeeded; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed, riveted and sealed here by the heart, or in silencing some one who speaks softly to me when I am alone. That is why I have come hither to tell you everything this morning. Everything or nearly everything.
　　It is useless to tell you that which concerns only myself; I keep that to myself.
　　You know the essential points.
　　So I have taken my mystery and have brought it to you.
　　And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes. It was not a resolution that was easy to take.
　　I struggled all night long.
　　Ah! you think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieu affair, that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury, that the name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself, out of gratitude for a service rendered to him, and that I might assuredly keep it, and that I should be happy in that chamber which you offer me, that I should not be in any one's way, that I should be in my own little corner, and that, while you would have Cosette, I should have the idea that I was in the same house with her.
　　Each one of us would have had his share of happiness.
　　If I continued to be Monsieur Fauchelevent, that would arrange everything.
　　Yes, with the exception of my soul. There was joy everywhere upon my surface, but the bottom of my soul remained black.
　　It is not enough to be happy, one must be content. Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent, thus I should have concealed my true visage, thus, in the presence of your expansion, I should have had an enigma, thus, in the midst of your full noonday, I should have had shadows, thus, without crying `'ware,' I should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside, I should have taken my seat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was, you would drive me from it, I should have allowed myself to be served by domestics who, had they known, would have said: `How horrible!'
　　I should have touched you with my elbow, which you have a right to dislike, I should have filched your clasps of the hand!
　　There would have existed in your house a division of respect between venerable white locks and tainted white locks; at your most intimate hours, when all hearts thought themselves open to the very bottom to all the rest, when we four were together, your grandfather, you two and myself, a stranger would have been present! I should have been side by side with you in your existence, having for my only care not to disarrange the cover of my dreadful pit. Thus, I, a dead man, should have thrust myself upon you who are living beings.
　　I should have condemned her to myself forever. You and Cosette and I would have had all three of our heads in the green cap!
　　Does it not make you shudder?
　　I am only the most crushed of men; I should have been the most monstrous of men. And I should have committed that crime every day!
　　And I should have had that face of night upon my visage every day! every day! And I should have communicated to you a share in my taint every day! every day! to you, my dearly beloved, my children, to you, my innocent creatures!
　　Is it nothing to hold one's peace? is it a simple matter to keep silence?
　　No, it is not simple.
　　There is a silence which lies.
　　And my lie, and my fraud and my indignity, and my cowardice and my treason and my crime, I should have drained drop by drop, I should have spit it out, then swallowed it again, I should have finished at midnight and have begun again at midday, and my `good morning' would have lied, and my `good night' would have lied, and I should have slept on it, I should have eaten it, with my bread, and I should have looked Cosette in the face, and I should have responded to the smile of the angel by the smile of the damned soul, and I should have been an abominable villain! Why should I do it? in order to be happy.
　　In order to be happy. Have I the right to be happy?
　　I stand outside of life, Sir."
　　Jean Valjean paused.
　　Marius listened.
　　Such chains of ideas and of anguishes cannot be interrupted.
　　Jean Valjean lowered his voice once more, but it was no longer a dull voice--it was a sinister voice.
　　"You ask why I speak?
　　I am neither denounced, nor pursued, nor tracked, you say.
　　Yes!
　　I am denounced! yes!
　　I am tracked!
　　By whom? By myself.
　　It is I who bar the passage to myself, and I drag myself, and I push myself, and I arrest myself, and I execute myself, and when one holds oneself, one is firmly held."
　　And, seizing a handful of his own coat by the nape of the neck and extending it towards Marius:
　　"Do you see that fist?" he continued.
　　"Don't you think that 
it holds that collar in such a wise as not to release it? Well! conscience is another grasp!
　　If one desires to be happy, sir, one must never understand duty; for, as soon as one has comprehended it, it is implacable.
　　One would say that it punished you for comprehending it; but no, it rewards you; for it places you in a hell, where you feel God beside you.
　　One has no sooner lacerated his own entrails than he is at peace with himself."
  



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  