
Chapter XXI of Volume I
 THE discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, and Elizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarily attending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusion of her mother. As for the gentleman himself, his feelings were chiefly expressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her, but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoke to her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible of himself, were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whose civility in listening to him, was a seasonable relief to them all, and especially to her friend.
The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill humour or ill health. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabeth had hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan did not appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone on Saturday, and to Saturday he still meant to stay.
After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton, to inquire if Mr. Wickham were returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball. He joined them on their entering the town and attended them to their aunt's, where his regret and vexation, and the concern of every body was well talked over. -- To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledged that the necessity of his absence had been self imposed.
``I found,'' said he, ``as the time drew near, that I had better not meet Mr. Darcy; -- that to be in the same room, the same party with him for so many hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenes might arise unpleasant to more than myself.''
She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a full discussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civilly bestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back with them to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended to her. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all the compliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as an occasion of introducing him to her father and mother.
Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and was opened immediately. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little, hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair, flowing hand; and Elizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as she read it, and saw her dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollected herself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usual cheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxiety on the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and no sooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Jane invited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room, Jane taking out the letter, said,
``This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains, has surprised me a good deal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are on their way to town; and without any intention of coming back again. You shall hear what she says.''
She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the information of their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly, and of their meaning to dine that day in Grosvenor street, where Mr. Hurst had a house. The next was in these words.
``I do not pretend to regret any thing I shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend; but we will hope at some future period, to enjoy many returns of the delightful intercourse we have known, and in the mean while may lessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreserved correspondence. I depend on you for that.'' To these high flown expressions, Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust; and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she saw nothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that their absence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and as to the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must soon cease to regard it, in the enjoyment of his.
``It is unlucky,'' said she, after a short pause, ``that you should not be able to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we not hope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looks forward, may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightful intercourse you have known as friends, will be renewed with yet greater satisfaction as sisters? -- Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London by them.''
``Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return into Hertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you --''
``When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business which took him to London, might be concluded in three or four days, but as we are certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that when Charles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we have determined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spend his vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintance are already there for the winter; I wish I could hear that you, my dearest friend, had any intention of making one in the croud, but of that I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire may abound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that your beaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of the three of whom we shall deprive you.'' ``It is evident by this,'' added Jane, ``that he comes back no more this winter.''
``It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean he should.''
``Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. -- He is his own master. But you do not know all. I will read you the passage which particularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from you.''
``Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister, and to confess the truth, we are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not think Georgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments; and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened into something still more interesting, from the hope we dare to entertain of her being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever before mentioned to you my feelings on this subject, but I will not leave the country without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem them unreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already, he will have frequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing, her relations all wish the connection as much as his own, and a sister's partiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles most capable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances to favour an attachment and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearest Jane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happiness of so many?''
``What think you of this sentence, my dear Lizzy?'' -- said Jane as she finished it. ``Is it not clear enough? -- Does it not expressly declare that Caroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she is perfectly convinced of her brother's indifference, and that if she suspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) to put me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?''
``Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. -- Will you hear it?''
``Most willingly.''
``You shall have it in few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother is in love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows him to town in the hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that he does not care about you.''
Jane shook her head.
``Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. -- No one who has ever seen you together, can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley I am sure cannot. She is not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr. Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But the case is this. We are not rich enough, or grand enough for them; and she is the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notion that when there has been one intermarriage, she may have less trouble in achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, and I dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But, my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingley tells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallest degree less sensible of your merit than when he took leave of you on Tuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that instead of being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.''
``If we thought alike of Miss Bingley,'' replied Jane, ``your representation of all this, might make me quite easy. But I know the foundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceiving any one; and all that I can hope in this case is, that she is deceived herself.''
``That is right. -- You could not have started a more happy idea, since you will not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived by all means. You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.''
``But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, in accepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marry elsewhere?''
``You must decide for yourself,'' said Elizabeth, ``and if, upon mature deliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters is more than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you by all means to refuse him.''
``How can you talk so?'' -- said Jane faintly smiling, -- ``You must know that though I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I could not hesitate.''
``I did not think you would; -- and that being the case, I cannot consider your situation with much compassion.''
``But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never be required. A thousand things may arise in six months!''
The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmost contempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline's interested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that those wishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young man so totally independent of every one.
She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felt on the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect. Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope, though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, that Bingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.
They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of the family, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct; but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern, and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happen to go away, just as they were all getting so intimate together. After lamenting it however at some length, she had the consolation of thinking that Mr. Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and the conclusion of all was the comfortable declaration that, though he had been invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have two full courses.关于柯林斯先生求婚问题的，讨论差不多就要结束了，现在伊丽莎白只感到一种照例难 免的的不愉快，有时候还要听她母亲埋怨一两声。说到那位先生本人，他可并不显得意气沮 丧，也没有表现出要回避她的样子，只是气愤愤地板着脸，默然无声。他简直不跟她说话， 他本来的那一股热情，到下半天都转移到卢卡斯小姐身上去了。卢小姐满有礼貌地听着他说 话，这叫大家都松了口气，特别是她的朋友。
班纳特太太直到第二天还是同样不高兴，身体也没有复元。柯林斯先生也还是那样又气 愤又傲慢的样子。伊丽莎白原以为他这样一气，就会早日离开此地，谁知道他决不因此而改 变原来的计划，他讲她要到星期六才走，便决定要待到星期六。
吃过早饭，小姐们上麦里屯去打听韦翰先生回来了没有，同时为了他没有参加尼日斐花 园的舞会而去向他表示惋惜。她们一走到镇上就遇见了他，于是他陪着小姐们上她们姨妈家 里去，他在那儿把他的歉意，他的烦恼，以及他对于每个人的关注，谈了个畅快。不过他却 在伊丽莎白面前自动说明，那次舞会是他自己不愿意去参加。
他说：“当时日期一天天迫近，我心里想，还是不要碰见达西先生的好；我觉得要同他 在同一间屋子里，在同一个舞会上，待上好几个钟头，那会叫我受不了，而且可能会闹出些 笑话来，弄得彼此都不开心。”
她非常赞美他的涵养功夫。当韦翰和另一位军官跟她们一块儿回浪博恩来的时候，一路 上他特别照顾她，因此他们有充分的空暇来讨论这个问题，而且还客客气气地彼此恭维了一 阵。他所以要伴送她们，是为了两大利益；一来可以让她高兴高兴，二来可以利用这个大好 机会，去认识认识她的双亲。
她们刚回到家里，班纳特小姐就接到一封从尼日斐花园寄来的信。信立刻拆开了，里面 装着一张小巧、精致、熨烫得很平滑的信笺，字迹是出自一位小姐的娟秀流利的手笔。伊丽 莎白看到姐姐读信时变了脸色，又看到她全神贯注在某几段上面。顷该之间，吉英又镇静了 下来，把信放在一旁，象平常一样，高高兴兴地跟大家一起聊天；可是伊丽莎白仍然为这件 事焦急，因此对韦翰也分心了。韦翰和他的同伴一走，吉英便对她做了个眼色，叫她跟上楼 去。一到了她们自己房里，吉英就拿出信来，说道：
“这是另罗琳・彬格莱写来的，信上的 话真叫我大吃一惊。她们一家人现在已经离开尼日斐花园上城里去了，再也不打算回来了。 你看看她怎么说的吧。”
于是她先把第一句念出来，那句话是说，她们已经决定，立刻追随她们的弟兄上城里 去，而且要在当天赶到格鲁斯汶纳街吃饭，原来赫斯脱先生就住在那条街上。接下去是这样 写的：──
“亲爱的朋友，离开哈福德郡，除了你的友谊以外，我真是一无留恋，不过，我 希望将来有一天，还是可以象过去那样愉快地来往，并希望目前能经常通信，无话不谈，以 抒离悃。临笔不胜企盼。”伊丽莎白对这些浮话奢词，亦只是姑妄听之；虽说她们这一次突 然的迁走叫她感到惊奇，可是她并不觉得真有什么可以惋惜的地方。她们离开了尼日斐花 园，未必彬格莱先生便不会再在那儿住下去；至于说到跟她们没有了来往，她相信吉英只要 跟彬格莱先生时常见面，也就无所谓了。
歇了片刻，伊丽莎白说道：“不幸得很，你朋友们临走以前，你没有来得及去看她们一 次。可是，彬格莱小姐既然认为将来还有重聚的欢乐，难道我们不能希望这一天比她意料中 来得早一些吗？将来做了姑嫂，不是比今天做朋友更满意吗？彬格莱先生不会被她们久留在 伦敦的。”
“咖罗琳肯定地说，她们一家人，今年冬天谁也不会回到哈福郡来了。让我念给你听 吧：
‘我哥哥昨天和我们告别的时候，还以为他这次上伦敦去，只要三四天就可以把事情办 好；可是我们认为办不到，同时我们相信，查尔斯一进了城，决不肯马上就走，因此我们决 计追踪前去，免得他冷冷清清住在旅馆里受罪。我很多朋友都上伦敦去过冬了；亲爱的朋 友，我本来还希望听到你进城去的消息，结果我失望了。我真挚地希望你在哈福德郡照常能 够极其愉快地度过圣诞节。希望你有很多漂亮的男朋友，免得我们一走，你便会因为少了三 个朋友而感到难受。’
“这明明是说，”吉英补充道，“他今年冬天不会回来啦。”
“这不过说明彬格莱小姐不要他回来罢了。”
“你为什么这样想法？那一定是他自己的意思。他自己可以作主。可是你还没有全部知 道呢。我一定要把那特别叫我伤心的一段读给你听。我对你完全不必忌讳。
‘达西先生急着 要去看看他妹妹；说老实话，我们也差不多同样热切地希望和她重逢。我以为乔治安娜・达 西无论在容貌方面，举止方面，才艺方面，的确再也没有人能够比得上。露薏莎和我都大胆 地希望她以后会做我们的嫂嫂，因此我们对她便越发关切了。我不知道以前有没有跟你提起 过我对这件事的感觉，可是当此离开乡村之际，我不愿意不把这些感觉说出来，我相信你不 会觉得这是不合理的吧。我的哥哥已经深深地受上了她，他现在可以时常去看她，他们自会 更加亲密起来；双方的家庭方面都同样盼望这门亲事能够成功。我想，如果我说，查尔斯最 善于博取任何女人的欢心，这可不能是出于做姐妹的偏心，瞎说一阵吧。既是各方面都赞成 这段姻缘，而且事情毫无阻碍，那么，最亲爱的吉英，我衷心希望着这件人人乐意的事能够 实现，你能说我错吗？’
"你觉得这一句怎么样，亲爱的丽萃？”吉英读完了以后说。“说得 还不够清楚吗？这不是明明白白地表明她们不希望、也不愿意我做她们的嫂嫂吗？不是说明 了她完全相信他的哥哥对我无所谓吗？而且不也是说明了：假如她怀疑到我对他有感情，她 就要劝我（多亏她这样好心肠！）当心些吗？这些话还能有别的解释吗？”
“当然可以有别的解释；我的解释就和你的解释完全两样。你愿意听一听吗？‘
“非常愿意。”
“这只消三言两语就可以说明白。彬格莱小姐看出他哥哥爱上了你，可是她却希望他和 达西小姐结婚。她跟着他到城里去，就为的是要把他绊住在那儿，而且竭力想来说服你，叫 你相信他对你没有好感。”
吉英摇摇头。
“吉英，你的确应该相信我。凡是看见过你们俩在一起的人，都不会怀疑到他的感情。 我相信彬格莱小姐也不会怀疑，她不是那么一个傻瓜。要是她看到达西先生对她的爱有这样 的一半，她就要办嫁妆了。可是问题是这样的：在她们家里看来，我们还不够有钱，也不够 有势，她所以急于想把达西小姐配给她哥哥，原来还有一个打算，那就是说，亲上加亲以 后，亲上再加亲就更省事了。这件事当然很费了一些心机，我敢说，要不是德・包尔小姐从 中作梗，事情是会成功的。可是最亲爱的吉英，你千万不要因为彬格莱小姐告诉你说，她哥 哥已经深深地爱上了达西小姐，你就以为彬格莱先生自从星期二和你分别以来，对你的倾心 有丝毫变卦，也别以为她真有本事叫她哥哥不爱你，而去爱上她那位女朋友。”
“假如我对彬格莱小姐看法是一致的，”吉英回答道，“那么，你的一切想法就会大大 地让我安心了。可是我知道你这种说法很偏心。珈罗琳不会故意欺骗任何人，我对这件事只 能存一个希望，那就是说，一定是她自己想错了。”
“这话说得对。我的想法既然不能安慰你，你自己居然转得出这样的好念头来，那是再 好也没有了，你就相信是她自己想错了吧。现在你算是对她尽了责任，再也用不着烦恼。”
“可是，亲爱的妹妹，即使从最好的方面去着想，我能够给这个人的，而他的姐妹和朋 友们都希望他跟别人结婚，这样我会幸福吗？”
“那就得看你自己的主张如何，”伊丽莎白说。“如果你考虑成熟以后，认为得罪了他 的姐妹们所招来的痛苦，比起做他的太太所得来的幸福还要大，那么，我劝你决计拒绝了他 算数。”
“你怎么说得出这种话？”吉英微微一笑。“你要知道，即使她们的反对使我万分难 受，我还是不会犹豫的。”
“我并没有说你会犹豫；既然如此，我就可以不必再为你担心了。”
“倘若他今年冬天不回来，我就用不着左思右想了。六个月里会有多少变动啊。”
所谓他不会回来，这种想法伊丽莎白大不以为然。她觉得那不过是咖罗琳一厢情愿。她 认为珈罗琳这种愿望无论是露骨地说出来也罢，委婉地说出来也罢，对于一个完全无求于人 的青年来说，决不会发生丝毫影响。
她把自己对这个问题的感想，解释给她姐姐听，果然一下子就收到了很好的效果，她觉 得非常高兴。吉英这样的性子，本来不会轻易意志消沉，从此便渐渐产生了希望认为彬格莱 先生准定会回到尼日斐花园一，使她万事如意，尽管有时候她还是怀疑多于希望。
最后姐妹俩一致主张，这事在班纳特太太面前不宜多说，只要告诉她一声，这一家人家 已经离开此地，不必向她说明他走原因；可是班纳特太太光是听到这片段的消息，已经大感 不安，甚至还哭了起来，埋怨自己运气太坏，两位贵妇人刚刚跟她处熟就走了。不过伤心了 一阵以后，她又用这样的想法来安慰自己；彬格莱先生不久就会回来，到浪博恩来吃饭；最 后她心安理得地说，虽然只不过邀他来便饭，她一定要费些心思，请他吃两道大菜。

<- ->