
Chapter VIII of Volume I
 AT five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half past six Elizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil enquiries which then poured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing the much superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a very favourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearing this, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, how shocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they disliked being ill themselves, and then thought no more of the matter; and their indifference towards Jane, when not immediately before them, restored Elizabeth to the enjoyment of all her original dislike.
Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she could regard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and his attentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feeling herself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by the others. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley was engrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr. Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only to eat, drink, and play at cards, who, when he found her prefer a plain dish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.
When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingley began abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners were pronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence; she had no conversation, no stile, no taste, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought the same, and added,
``She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellent walker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She really looked almost wild.''
``She did indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Very nonsensical to come at all! Why must she be scampering about the country, because her sister had a cold? Her hair so untidy, so blowsy!''
``Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deep in mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down to hide it not doing its office.''
``Your picture may be very exact, Louisa,'' said Bingley; ``but this was all lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkably well, when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quite escaped my notice.''
``You observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure,'' said Miss Bingley, ``and I am inclined to think that you would not wish to see your sister make such an exhibition.''
``Certainly not.''
``To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is, above her ancles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! what could she mean by it? It seems to me to shew an abominable sort of conceited independence, a most country-town indifference to decorum.''
``It shews an affection for her sister that is very pleasing,'' said Bingley.
``I am afraid, Mr. Darcy,'' observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, ``that this adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.''
``Not at all,'' he replied; ``they were brightened by the exercise.'' -- A short pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again.
``I have an excessive regard for Jane Bennet, she is really a very sweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But with such a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there is no chance of it.''
``I think I have heard you say, that their uncle is an attorney in Meryton.''
``Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.''
``That is capital,'' added her sister, and they both laughed heartily.
``If they had uncles enough to fill all Cheapside,'' cried Bingley, ``it would not make them one jot less agreeable.''
``But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of any consideration in the world,'' replied Darcy.
To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it their hearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense of their dear friend's vulgar relations.
With a renewal of tenderness, however, they repaired to her room on leaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee. She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all till late in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her asleep, and when it appeared to her rather right than pleasant that she should go down stairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the whole party at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspecting them to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister the excuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could stay below with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment.
``Do you prefer reading to cards?'' said he; ``that is rather singular.''
``Miss Eliza Bennet,'' said Miss Bingley, ``despises cards. She is a great reader and has no pleasure in anything else.''
``I deserve neither such praise nor such censure,'' cried Elizabeth; ``I am not a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.''
``In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure,'' said Bingley; ``and I hope it will soon be increased by seeing her quite well.''
Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards a table where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch her others; all that his library afforded.
``And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my own credit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have more than I ever look into.''
Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with those in the room.
``I am astonished,'' said Miss Bingley, ``that my father should have left so small a collection of books. -- What a delightful library you have at Pemberley, Mr. Darcy!''
``It ought to be good,'' he replied, ``it has been the work of many generations.''
``And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buying books.''
``I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days as these.''
``Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties of that noble place. Charles, when you build your house, I wish it may be half as delightful as Pemberley.''
``I wish it may.''
``But I would really advise you to make your purchase in that neighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not a finer county in England than Derbyshire.''
``With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.''
``I am talking of possibilities, Charles.''
``Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to get Pemberley by purchase than by imitation.''
Elizabeth was so much caught by what passed, as to leave her very little attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drew near the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and his eldest sister to observe the game.
``Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?'' said Miss Bingley; ``will she be as tall as I am?''
``I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, or rather taller.''
``How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted me so much. Such a countenance, such manners, and so extremely accomplished for her age! Her performance on the piano-forte is exquisite.''
``It is amazing to me,'' said Bingley, ``how young ladies can have patience to be so very accomplished as they all are.''
``All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?''
``Yes all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover skreens, and net purses. I scarcely know any one who cannot do all this, and I am sure I never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without being informed that she was very accomplished.''
``Your list of the common extent of accomplishments,'' said Darcy, ``has too much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it no otherwise than by netting a purse, or covering a skreen. But I am very far from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. I cannot boast of knowing more than half a dozen, in the whole range of my acquaintance, that are really accomplished.''
``Nor I, I am sure,'' said Miss Bingley.
``Then,'' observed Elizabeth, ``you must comprehend a great deal in your idea of an accomplished women.''
``Yes; I do comprehend a great deal in it.''
``Oh! certainly,'' cried his faithful assistant, ``no one can be really esteemed accomplished, who does not greatly surpass what is usually met with. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing, dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besides all this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner of walking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the word will be but half deserved.''
``All this she must possess,'' added Darcy, ``and to all this she must yet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind by extensive reading.''
``I am no longer surprised at your knowing only six accomplished women. I rather wonder now at your knowing any.''
``Are you so severe upon your own sex, as to doubt the possibility of all this?''
``I never saw such a woman, I never saw such capacity, and taste, and application, and elegance, as you describe, united.''
Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of her implied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women who answered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, with bitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As all conversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left the room.
``Eliza Bennet,'' said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her, ``is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to the other sex by undervaluing their own, and with many men, I dare say, it succeeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.''
``Undoubtedly,'' replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed, ``there is meanness in all the arts which ladies sometimes condescend to employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning is despicable.''
Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as to continue the subject.
Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, and that she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones's being sent for immediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice could be of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the most eminent physicians. This she would not hear of, but she was not so unwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settled that Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning if Miss Bennet were not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sisters declared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness, however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better relief to his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that every possible attention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.五点钟的时候，主人家两姐妹出去更衣；六点半的时候伊丽莎白被请去吃晚饭。大家都 礼貌周全，纷纷来探问吉英的病情，其中尤其是彬格莱先生问得特别关切，这叫伊丽莎白非 常愉快，只可惜吉英的病情一些没有好转，因此她无法给人家满意的回答。那姐妹听到这 话，便几次三番地说她们是多么担心，说重伤风是多么可怕，又说她们自己多么讨厌生病， ──说过了这些话以后就不当它一回事了。伊丽莎白看到她们当吉英不在她们面前的时候就 对吉英这般冷淡，于是她本来那种讨厌她们的心理现在又重新滋长起来。
的确，她们这家人 里面只有她们的兄弟能使她称心满意，你一眼便可以看出他是真的在为吉英担忧，再说他对 于伊丽莎白也殷勤和悦到极点。伊丽莎白本以为人家会把她看作一个不速之客，可是有了这 份殷勤，她就不这么想了。除他以外，别人都不大理睬她。彬格莱小姐的心在达西先生身 上，赫斯脱太太差不多也没有什么两样；再说到赫斯脱先生，他就坐在伊丽莎白身旁，他天 生一副懒骨头，活在世上就是为了吃、喝、玩牌，他听到伊丽莎白宁可吃一碟普通的菜而不 喜欢吃烩肉，便和她谈不上劲了。
伊丽莎白一吃过晚饭就回到吉英那儿去。她一走出饭厅，彬格莱小姐就开始说她的坏 话，把她的作风说得坏透了，说她既傲慢又无礼貌，不懂得跟人家攀谈，仪表不佳，风趣索 然，人又长得难看。赫斯脱太太也是同样的看法，而且还补充了几句：
“总而言之，她除了跑路的本领以外，没有要样别的长处。她今儿早上那副样子我才永 远忘不了呢，简直象个疯子。”
“她的确象个疯子，露薏莎。我简直忍不住要笑出来。她这一趟来得无聊透顶；姐姐伤 了点风，干吗要她那么大惊小怪地跑遍了整个村庄？──头发给弄得那么蓬乱，那么邋 遢！”
“是呀，还有她的衬裙──可惜你没看到她的衬裙。我绝对不是瞎说，那上面糊上了有 足足六英寸泥，她把外面的裙子放低了些，想把来遮盖，可是遮盖不住。”彬格莱先生说： “你形容得并没有过火的地方，露薏莎，可是我并不以为然。我倒觉得伊丽莎白・班纳特小 姐今儿早上走进屋来的时候，那种神情风度很不错呢。我并没有看到她的肮脏的衬裙。”
“你一定看到的，达西先生，”彬格莱小姐说，“我想，你总不愿意看到你自己的姐妹 弄成那副狼狈样子吧。”
“当然不愿意。“
“无缘无故赶上那么三英里路、五英里路，谁晓得多少英里呢，泥土盖没了踝骨，而且 是孤孤单单的一个人！她这究竟是什么意思？我看她十足表现了没有家教的野态，完全是乡 下人不懂礼貌的轻狂。“
彬格莱先生说：“那正说明了她的手足情深，真是好极了。”
彬格莱小姐死样怪气地说：“达西先生，我倒担心，她这次的冒失行为，会影响你对她 那双美丽的眼睛的爱慕吧？”
达西回答道：“一点儿影响也没有，她跑过了这趟路以后，那双眼睛更加明亮了。”说 完这句话，屋子里稍许沉默了一会儿，然后赫斯脱太太又开口说话：
“我非常关心吉英・班纳特──她倒的确是位可爱的姑娘──我诚心诚意地希望她好好 儿攀门亲事。只可惜遇到那样的父母，加上还有那么些下流的亲戚，我怕她没有什么指望 了。”
“我不是听你说过，她有个姨爹在麦里屯当律师吗？”
“是呀；她们还有个舅舅住在齐普赛附近。”
“那真妙极了，”她的妹妹补充了一句，于是姐妹俩都纵情大笑。
彬格莱一听此话，便大叫起来：“即使她们有多得数不清的舅舅，可以把整个齐普赛都 塞满，也不能把她们讨人喜爱的地方减损分毫。”
“可是，她们倘使想嫁给有地位的男人，机会可就大大减少了，”达西回答道。
彬格莱先生没有理睬为句话；他的姐妹们却听得非常得意，于是越发放肆无忌地拿班纳 特小姐的微贱的亲戚开玩笑，开了老半天。
不过她们一离开了饭厅，就重新做出百般温柔体贴的样子，来到吉英房间里，一直陪着 她坐到喝咖啡的时候。吉英的病还不见好转，伊丽莎白寸步不离地守着她，一直到黄昏，看 见她睡着了，才放下了心，觉得自己应该到楼下去一趟（虽说她并不乐意下楼去）。走进客 厅，她发觉大家正在玩牌，大家当时立刻邀她也来玩，可是她恐怕他们输赢很大，便谢绝 了，只推说放心不下姐姐，一会儿就得上楼去，她可以拿本书来消消遣遣。赫斯脱先生惊奇 地朝她望了一下。
“你宁可看书，不要玩牌吗？”他说。“这真是少有。”
彬格莱小姐说：“伊丽莎・班纳特小姐瞧不起玩牌，她是个了不起的读书人，对别的事 都不感到乐趣。”
伊丽莎白嚷道：“这样的夸奖我不敢当，这样的责备我也不敢当，我并不是什么了不起 的读书人，很多东西我都感到乐趣。”
彬格莱先生说：“我断定乐意照料你自己的姐姐，但愿她快些复元，那你就会更加快活 了。”
伊丽莎白从心底里感激他，然后走到一张放了几本书的桌子跟前。他立刻要另外拿些书 来给她──把他书房里所有的书都拿来。“要是我的藏书多一些就好啦，无论是为你的益处 着想，为我自己的面子着想；可是我是个懒鬼，藏书不多，读过的就更少了。”伊丽莎白跟 他说，房间里那几本书尽够她看了。
彬格莱小姐说：“我很奇怪，爸爸怎么只遣留下来了这么几本书。──达西先生，你在 彭伯里的那个藏书室真是好极了！”
达西说：“那有什么稀奇。那是好几代的成绩啊。”
“你自己又添置了不少书，只看见你老是在买书。”
“我有现在这样的日子过，自然不好意思疏忽家里的藏书室。“
“疏忽！我相信凡是能为你那个高贵的地方啬主观的东西，你一件也没疏忽过。──查 尔斯，以后你自己建筑住宅的时候，我只希望有彭伯里一半那么美丽就好了。”
“但愿如此。”
“可是我还要竭力奉劝你就在那儿附近购买房产，而且要拿彭伯里做个榜样。全英国没 有哪一个郡比德比郡更好了。”
“我非常高兴那么办。我真想干脆就把彭伯里买下来，只要达西肯卖。”
“我是在谈谈可能办到的事情，查尔斯。”
“珈罗琳，我敢说，买下彭伯里比仿照彭伯里的式样造房子，可能性更大些。”伊丽莎 白听这些话听得出了神，弄得没心思看书了，索性把书放在一旁，走到牌桌跟前，坐在彬格 莱先生和他的妹妹之间，看他们斗牌。
这时彬格莱小姐又问达西：“从春天到现在，达西长高了很多吧？她将来会长到我这么 高吧？”
“我想会吧。她现在大概有伊丽莎白・班纳特小姐那么高了，恐怕还要高一点。”
“我直想再见见她！我从来没碰到过这么使我喜爱的人。模样儿那么好，又那样懂得礼 貌，小小的年纪就出落得多才多艺，她的钢琴真弹得高明极了。”
彬格莱先生说：“这真叫我惊奇，年轻的姑娘们怎么一个个都有那么大的能耐，把自己 锻炼和多才多艺。”
“一个个年轻的姑娘们都是多才多艺！亲受的查尔斯，你这话是什么意思呀？”
“是的，我认为一个个都是那样。她们都会装饰台桌，点缀屏风，编织钱袋。我简直就 没有见过哪一位不是样样都会，而且每逢听人谈起一个年轻姑娘，，没有哪一次不听说她是 多才多艺的。”*
达西说：“你这一套极其平凡的所谓才艺，倒是千真万确。多少女人只不过会编织钱 袋，点缀屏风，就享有了多才多艺的美名；可是我却不能同意你对一般妇女的估价。我不敢 说大话；我认识很多女人，而真正多才多艺的实在不过半打。”
“我也的确不敢说大话，”彬格莱小姐说。
伊丽莎白说：“那么，在你的想象中，一个多才多艺的妇女应该包括很多条件啦。”
“不错，我认为应该包括很多条件。”
“噢，当然罗，”他的忠实助手叫起来了，“要是一个妇女不能超越常人，就不能算是 多才多艺。一个女人必须精通音乐、歌唱、图画、舞蹈以及现代语文，那才当得起这个称 号；除此以外，她的仪表和步态，她的声调，她的谈吐和表情，都得有相当风趣，否则她就 不够资格。”
达西接着说：“她除了具备这些条件以外，还应该多读书，长见识，有点真才实学。”
“怪不得你只认识六个才女啦。我现在简直疑心你连一个也不认识呢。”
“你怎么对你们女人这般苛求，竟以为她们不可能具备这些条件？”
“我从来没见过这样的女人。我从来没见过哪一个人象你所说的这样有才干，有情趣， 又那么好学，那么仪态优雅。”
赫斯脱太太和彬格莱小姐都叫起来了，说她不应该表示怀疑，因为这种怀疑是不公平 的，而且她们还一致提出反证，说她们自己就知道有很多女人都够得上这些条件。一直等到 赫斯脱先生叫她们好好打牌，怪她们不该对牌场上的事那么漫不经心，她们才住嘴，一场争 论就这样结束了，伊丽莎白没有多久也走开了。
门关上之后，彬格莱小姐说，“有些女人们为了自抬身价，往往在男人们面前编派女 人，伊丽莎白・班纳特就是这样一个女人，这种手段在某些男人身上也许会发生效果，但是 我认为这是一种下贱的诡计，一种卑鄙的手腕。”
达西听出她这几句话是有意说给他自己听的，便连忙答道：“毫无疑问，姑娘们为了勾 引男子，有时竟不择手段，使用巧计，这真是卑鄙。只要你的做法带有几分狡诈，都应该受 到鄙弃。”
彬格莱小姐不太满意他这个回答，因此也就没有再谈下去。
伊丽莎白又到他们这儿来了一次，只是为了告诉他们一声，她姐姐的病更加严重了，她 不能离开。彬格醚再三主张立刻请钟斯大夫来，他的姐妹们却都以为乡下郎中无济于是，主 张赶快到城里去请一位最有名的大夫来，伊丽莎白不赞成，不过她也不便太辜负她们兄弟的 一番盛意，于是大家协商出了一个办法；如果班纳特小姐明儿一大早依旧毫无起色，就马上 去请钟斯大夫来。彬格莱先生心里非常不安，他的姐姐和妹妹也说是十分担忧。吃过晚饭以 后，她们俩总算合奏了几支歌来消除了一些烦闷，而彬格莱先生因为想不出好办法来解除焦 虑，便只有关照他那管家婆尽心尽意地照料病人和病人的妹妹。

<- ->