
Chapter I of Volume II
 MISS Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very first sentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London for the winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having had time to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he left the country.
Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the rest of the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of the writer, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupied the chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Caroline boasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predict the accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her former letter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being an inmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some plans of the latter with regard to new furniture. Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this, heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concern for her sister, and resentment against all the others. To Caroline's assertion of her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid no credit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than she had ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, she could not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easiness of temper, that want of proper resolution which now made him the slave of his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice his own happiness to the caprice of their inclinations. Had his own happiness, however, been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it in what ever manner he thought best; but her sister's was involved in it, as, she thought, he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short, on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. She could think of nothing else, and yet whether Bingley's regard had really died away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whether he had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped his observation; whichever were the case, though her opinion of him must be materially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remained the same, her peace equally wounded.
A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings to Elizabeth; but at last on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after a longer irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she could not help saying,
``Oh! that my dear mother had more command over herself; she can have no idea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. But I will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shall all be as we were before.''
Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but said nothing.
``You doubt me,'' cried Jane, slightly colouring; ``indeed you have no reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of my acquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear, and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not that pain. A little time therefore. -- I shall certainly try to get the better.''
With a stronger voice she soon added, ``I have this comfort immediately, that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that it has done no harm to any one but myself.''
``My dear Jane!'' exclaimed Elizabeth, ``you are too good. Your sweetness and disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to say to you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as you deserve.''
Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw back the praise on her sister's warm affection.
``Nay,'' said Elizabeth, ``this is not fair. You wish to think all the world respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of any body. I only want to think you perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do not be afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on your privilege of universal good will. You need not. There are few people whom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I see of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirms my belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of either merit or sense. I have met with two instances lately; one I will not mention; the other is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! in every view it is unaccountable!''
``My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They will ruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for difference of situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, and Charlotte's prudent, steady character. Remember that she is one of a large family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and be ready to believe, for every body's sake, that she may feel something like regard and esteem for our cousin.''
``To oblige you, I would try to believe almost any thing, but no one else could be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded that Charlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of her understanding, than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is a conceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well as I do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who marries him, cannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, though it is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual, change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuade yourself or me that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility of danger, security for happiness.''
``I must think your language too strong in speaking of both,'' replied Jane, ``and I hope you will be convinced of it, by seeing them happy together. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. You mentioned two instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I intreat you, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking that person to blame, and saying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancy ourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young man to be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing but our own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more than it does.''
``And men take care that they should.''
``If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no idea of there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.''
``I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design,'' said Elizabeth; ``but without scheming to do wrong, or to make others unhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness, want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution, will do the business.''
``And do you impute it to either of those?''
``Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying what I think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.''
``You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him.''
``Yes, in conjunction with his friend.''
``I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They can only wish his happiness, and if he is attached to me, no other woman can secure it.''
``Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides his happiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; they may wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, great connections, and pride.''
``Beyond a doubt, they do wish him to chuse Miss Darcy,'' replied Jane; ``but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They have known her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they love her better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikely they should have opposed their brother's. What sister would think herself at liberty to do it, unless there were something very objectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not try to part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such an affection, you make every body acting unnaturally and wrong, and me most unhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having been mistaken -- or, at least, it is slight, it is nothing in comparison of what I should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it in the best light, in the light in which it may be understood.''
Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley's name was scarcely ever mentioned between them.
Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning no more, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not account for it clearly, there seemed little chance of her ever considering it with less perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what she did not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely the effect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw her no more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted at the time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's best comfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.
Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. ``So, Lizzy,'' said he one day, ``your sister is crossed in love I find. I congratulate her. Next to being married, a girl likes to be crossed in love a little now and then. It is something to think of, and gives her a sort of distinction among her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear to be long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough at Meryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickham be your man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.''
``Thank you, Sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must not all expect Jane's good fortune.''
``True,'' said Mr. Bennet, ``but it is a comfort to think that, whatever of that kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will always make the most of it.''
Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloom, which the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbourn family. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was now added that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had already heard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him, was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and every body was pleased to think how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before they had known any thing of the matter.
Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might be any extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the society of Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded for allowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes -- but by everybody else Mr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.彬格莱小姐的信来了，疑虑消除了。信上第一句话就说，她们决定在伦敦过冬，结尾是 替他哥哥道歉，说他在临走以前，没有来得及向哈福郡的朋友们辞行，很觉遗憾。
希望破灭了，彻底破灭了。吉英继续把信读下去，只觉得除了写信人那种装腔作势的亲 切之外，就根本找不出可以自慰的地方。满篇都是赞美达西小姐的话，絮絮叨叨地谈到她的 千娇百媚。珈罗琳又高高兴兴地说，她们俩之间已经一天比一天来得亲热，而且竟大胆地作 出预言，说是她上封信里面提到的那些愿望，一定可以实现。她还得意非凡地写道，她哥哥 已经住到达西先生家里去，又欢天喜地地提到达西打算添置新家具。
吉英立刻把这些事大都告诉了伊丽莎白，伊丽莎白听了，怒而不言。她真伤心透了，一 方面是关怀自己的姐姐，另方面是怨恨那帮人。珈罗琳信上说她哥哥钟情于达西小姐，伊丽 莎白无论如何也不相信。她仍旧象以往一样，相信彬格莱先生真正喜欢吉英。伊丽莎白一向 很看重他，现在才知道他原来是这样一个容易说话而没有主意的人，以致被他那批诡计多端 的朋友们牵制住了，听凭他们反复无常地作弄他，拿他的幸福作牺牲品──想到这些，她就 不能不气愤，甚至不免有些看不起他。要是只有他个人的幸福遭到牺牲，那他爱怎么胡搞都 可以，可是这里面毕竟还牵涉着她姐姐的幸福，她相信他自己也应该明白。简单说来，这问 题当然反复考虑过，到头来一定是没有办法。她想不起什么别的了。究竟是彬格莱先生真的 变了心呢，还是根本不知道？虽然对她说来，她应该辨明其中的是非曲直，然后才能断定他 是好是坏，可是对她姐姐说来，反正都是一样地伤心难受。
隔了一两天，吉英才鼓起勇气，把自己的心事说给伊丽莎白听。且说那天班纳特太太象 往常一样说起尼日斐花园和它的主人，唠叨了老半天，后来总算走开了，只剩下她们姐妹 俩，吉英这才禁不往说道：
“噢，但愿妈妈多控制她自己一些吧！她没晓得她这样时时刻刻提起他，叫我多么痛 苦。不过我决不怨谁。这局面不会长久的。他马上就会给我们忘掉，我们还是会和往常一 样。”
伊丽莎白半信半疑而又极其关切地望着姐姐，一声不响。
“你不相信我的话吗？”吉英微微红着脸嚷道。“那你真是毫无理由。他在我的记忆里 可能是个最可爱的朋友，但也不过如此而已。我既没有什么奢望，也没有什么担心，更没有 什么要责备他的地方。多谢上帝，我还没有那种苦恼。因此稍微过一些时候，我一定会就慢 慢克服过来的。”
她立刻又用更坚强的声调说道：“我立刻就可以安慰自己说：这只怪我自己瞎想，好在 并没有损害别人，只损害了我自己。”
伊丽莎白连忙叫起来了：“亲爱的吉英，你太善良了。你那样好心，那样处处为别人着 想，真象天使一般；我不知道应该怎么同你说才好。我觉得我从前待你还不够好，爱你还不 够深。”
吉英竭力否认这一切言过其实的夸奖，反而用这些赞美的话来赞扬妹妹的热情。
“别那么说，”伊丽莎白说，“这样说不公平的，你总以为天下都是好人。我只要说了 谁一句坏话，你就难受。我要把你看作一个完美无瑕的人，你就来驳斥。请你放心，我决不 会说得过分，你有权利把四海之内的人一视同仁，我也不会干涉你。你用不着担心。至于 我，我真正喜欢的人没有几个，我心目中的好人就更少了。世事经历得愈多，我就愈对世事 不满；我一天比一天相信，人性都是见异思迁，我们不能凭着某人表面上一点点长处或见 解，就去相信他。最近我碰到了两件事：其中一件我不愿意说出来，另一件就是夏绿蒂的婚 姻问题。这简直是莫明其妙！任你怎样看法，都是莫明其妙！”
“亲爱的丽萃，不要这样胡思乱想吧。那会毁了你的幸福的。你对于各人处境的不同和 脾气的不同，体谅得不够。你且想一想柯林斯先生的身份地位和夏绿蒂的谨慎稳重吧。你得 记住，她也算一个大家闺秀，说起财产方面，倒是一门挺适当的亲事。你且顾全大家的面 子，只当她对我们那位表兄确实有几分敬爱和器重吧。”
“要是看你的面子，我几乎随便对什么事都愿意以为真，可是这对于任何人都没有益 处；我现在只觉得夏绿蒂根本不懂得爱情，要是再叫我去相信她是当真爱上了柯林斯，那我 又要觉得她简直毫无见识。亲爱的吉英，柯林斯先生是个自高自大、喜爱炫耀、心胸狭窄的 蠢汉，这一点你和我懂得一样清楚，你也会同我一样地感觉到，只有头脑不健全的女人才肯 嫁给他。虽说这个女人就是夏绿蒂・卢卡斯，你也不必为她辩护。你千万不能为了某一个人 而改变原则，破格迁就，也不要千方百计地说服我，或是说服你自己去相信，自私自利就是 谨慎，糊涂胆大就等于幸福有了保障。”
“讲到这两个人，我以为你的话说得太过火，”吉英说。“但愿你日后看到他们俩幸福 相处的时候，就会相信我的话不假。这件事可也谈够了，你且谈另外一件吧。你不是举出了 两件事吗？我不会误解你，可是，亲爱的丽萃，我求求你千万不要以为错是错在那个人身 上，千万不要说你瞧不起他，免得我感到痛苦。我们决不能随随便便就以为人家在有意伤害 我们。我们决不可能指望一个生龙活虎的青年会始终小心周到。我们往往会因为我们自己的 虚荣心，而给弄迷了心窍。女人们往往会把爱情这种东西幻想得太不切合实际。”
“因此男人们就故意逗她们那么幻想。”
“如果这桩事当真是存心安排好了的，那实在是他们不应该；可是世界上是否真如某些 人所想象的那样，到处都是计谋，我可不知道。”
“我决不是说彬格莱先生的行为是事先有了计谋的，”伊丽莎白说。“可是，即使没有 存心做坏事，或者说，没有存心叫别人伤心，事实上仍然会做错事情，引起不幸的后果。凡 是粗心大意、看不出别人的好心好意，而且缺乏果断，都一样能害人。”
“你看这桩事也得归到这类原因吗？”
“当然───应该归于最后一种原因。可是，如果叫我再说下去，说出我对于你所器重 的那些人是怎么看法，那也会叫你不高兴的。趁着现在我能够住嘴的时候，且让我住嘴 吧。”
“那么说，你断定是他的姐妹们操纵了他啦。”
“我不相信。她们为什么要操纵他？她们只有希望他幸福；要是他果真爱我，别的女人 便无从使他幸福。”
“你头一个想法就错了。她们除了希望他幸福以外，还有许多别的打算；她们会希望他 更有钱有势；她们会希望他跟一个出身高贵、亲朋显赫的阔女人结婚。”
“毫无问题，她们希望他选中达西小姐，”吉英说：“不过，说到这一点，她们也许是 出于一片好心，并不如你所想象的那么恶劣。她们认识她比认识我早得多，难怪她们更喜欢 她。可是不管她们自己愿望如何，她们总不至于违背她们兄弟的愿望吧。除非有了什么太看 不顺眼的地方，哪个做姐妹的会这样冒味？要是她们相信他爱上了我，她们决不会想要拆散 我们；要是他果真爱我，她们要拆散也拆散不成。如果你一定要以为他对我真有感情，那 么，她们这样做法，便是既不近人情，又荒谬绝伦，我也就更伤心了。不要用这种想法来使 我痛苦吧。我决不会因为一念之差而感到羞耻──即使感到羞耻也极其轻微，倒是一想起他 或他的姐妹们无情无义，我真不知道要难受多少倍呢。让我从最好的方面去想吧，从合乎人 情事理的方面去想吧。”
伊丽莎白无法反对她这种愿望，从此以后，她们就不大提起彬格莱先生的名字。
班纳特太太见他一去不回，仍然不断地纳闷，不断地抱怨，尽管伊丽莎白几乎没有哪一 天不给她解释个清楚明白，然而始终无法使她减少些忧烦。女儿尽力说她，尽说一些连她自 己也不相信的话给母亲听，说是彬格莱先生对于吉英的钟情，只不过是出于一时高兴，根本 算不上什么，一旦她不在他眼前，也就置诸度外了。虽然班纳特太太当时也相信这些话不 假，可是事后她又每天旧事重提，最后只有想出了一个聊以自慰的办法，指望彬格莱先生来 年夏天一定会回到这儿来。
班纳特先生对这件事可就抱着两样的态度。有一天他对伊丽莎白说：“嘿，丽萃，我发 觉你的姐姐失恋了。我倒要祝贺她。一个姑娘除了结婚以外，总喜欢不时地尝点儿失恋的滋 味。那可以使她们有点儿东西去想想，又可以在朋友们面前露露头角。几时轮到你头上来 呢？你也不愿意让吉英超前太久吧。现在你的机会来啦。麦里屯的军官们很多，足够使这个 村子里的每一个年轻的姑娘失意。让韦翰做你的对象吧。他是个有趣的家伙，他会用很体面 的办法把你遗弃。”
“多谢您，爸爸，差一些的人也能使我满意了。我们可不能个个都指望上吉英那样的好 运气。”
“不错，”班纳特先生说；“不管你交上了哪一种运气，你那位好心的妈妈反正会尽心 竭力来成全你的，你只要想到这一点，就会感到安慰了。”
浪搏恩府上因为近来出了几件不顺利的事，好些人都闷闷不乐，多亏有韦翰先生跟他们 来来往往，把这阵闷气消除了不少。她们常常看到他，对他赞不绝口，又说他坦白爽直。伊 丽莎白所听到的那一套话───说什么达西先生有多少地方对他不起，他为达西先生吃了多 少苦头───大家都公认了，而且公开加以谈论。每个人一想到自己远在完全不知道这件事 情时，早就十分讨厌达西先生，便不禁非常得意。
只有班纳特小姐以为这件事里面一定有些蹊跷，还不曾为哈福郡的人们弄清楚。她是个 性子柔和、稳重公正的人，总是要求人家多多体察实情，以为事情往往可能给弄错，可惜别 人全把达西先生看作天下再混账不过的人。

<- ->