
Chapter XVIII of Volume II (Chap. 41)
 THE first week of their return was soon gone. The second began. It was the last of the regiment's stay in Meryton, and all the young ladies in the neighbourhood were drooping apace. The dejection was almost universal. The elder Miss Bennets alone were still able to eat, drink, and sleep, and pursue the usual course of their employments. Very frequently were they reproached for this insensibility by Kitty and Lydia, whose own misery was extreme, and who could not comprehend such hard-heartedness in any of the family.
``Good Heaven! What is to become of us! What are we to do!'' would they often exclaim in the bitterness of woe. ``How can you be smiling so, Lizzy?''
Their affectionate mother shared all their grief; she remembered what she had herself endured on a similar occasion, five and twenty years ago.
``I am sure,'' said she, ``I cried for two days together when Colonel Millar's regiment went away. I thought I should have broke my heart.''
``I am sure I shall break mine,'' said Lydia.
``If one could but go to Brighton!'' observed Mrs. Bennet.
``Oh, yes! -- if one could but go to Brighton! But papa is so disagreeable.''
``A little sea-bathing would set me up for ever.''
``And my aunt Philips is sure it would do me a great deal of good,'' added Kitty.
Such were the kind of lamentations resounding perpetually through Longbourn-house. Elizabeth tried to be diverted by them; but all sense of pleasure was lost in shame. She felt anew the justice of Mr. Darcy's objections; and never had she before been so much disposed to pardon his interference in the views of his friend.
But the gloom of Lydia's prospect was shortly cleared away; for she received an invitation from Mrs. Forster, the wife of the Colonel of the regiment, to accompany her to Brighton. This invaluable friend was a very young woman, and very lately married. A resemblance in good humour and good spirits had recommended her and Lydia to each other, and out of their three months' acquaintance they had been intimate two.
The rapture of Lydia on this occasion, her adoration of Mrs. Forster, the delight of Mrs. Bennet, and the mortification of Kitty, are scarcely to be described. Wholly inattentive to her sister's feelings, Lydia flew about the house in restless ecstacy, calling for everyone's congratulations, and laughing and talking with more violence than ever; whilst the luckless Kitty continued in the parlour repining at her fate in terms as unreasonable as her accent was peevish.
``I cannot see why Mrs. Forster should not ask me as well as Lydia,'' said she, ``though I am not her particular friend. I have just as much right to be asked as she has, and more too, for I am two years older.''
In vain did Elizabeth attempt to reasonable, and Jane to make her resigned. As for Elizabeth herself, this invitation was so far from exciting in her the same feelings as in her mother and Lydia, that she considered it as the death-warrant of all possibility of common sense for the latter; and detestable as such a step must make her were it known, she could not help secretly advising her father not to let her go. She represented to him all the improprieties of Lydia's general behaviour, the little advantage she could derive from the friendship of such a woman as Mrs. Forster, and the probability of her being yet more imprudent with such a companion at Brighton, where the temptations must be greater than at home. He heard her attentively, and then said,
``Lydia will never be easy till she has exposed herself in some public place or other, and we can never expect her to do it with so little expense or inconvenience to her family as under the present circumstances.''
``If you were aware,'' said Elizabeth, ``of the very great disadvantage to us all, which must arise from the public notice of Lydia's unguarded and imprudent manner; nay, which has already arisen from it, I am sure you would judge differently in the affair.''
``Already arisen!'' repeated Mr. Bennet. ``What, has she frightened away some of your lovers? Poor little Lizzy! But do not be cast down. Such squeamish youths as cannot bear to be connected with a little absurdity are not worth a regret. Come, let me see the list of the pitiful fellows who have been kept aloof by Lydia's folly.''
``Indeed you are mistaken. I have no such injuries to resent, It is not of peculiar, but of general evils, which I am now complaining. Our importance, our respectability in the world, must be affected by the wild volatility, the assurance and disdain of all restraint which mark Lydia's character. Excuse me -- for I must speak plainly. If you, my dear father, will not take the trouble of checking her exuberant spirits, and of teaching her that her present pursuits are not to be the business of her life, she will soon be beyond the reach of amendment. Her character will be fixed, and she will, at sixteen, be the most determined flirt that ever made herself and her family ridiculous. A flirt, too, in the worst and meanest degree of flirtation; without any attraction beyond youth and a tolerable person; and from the ignorance and emptiness of her mind, wholly unable to ward off any portion of that universal contempt which her rage for admiration will excite. In this danger Kitty is also comprehended. She will follow wherever Lydia leads. -- Vain, ignorant, idle, and absolutely uncontrolled! Oh! my dear father, can you suppose it possible that they will not be censured and despised wherever they are known, and that their sisters will not be often involved in the disgrace?''
Mr. Bennet saw that her whole heart was in the subject; and affectionately taking her hand, said in reply,
``Do not make yourself uneasy, my love. Wherever you and Jane are known, you must be respected and valued; and you will not appear to less advantage for having a couple of -- or I may say, three -- very silly sisters. We shall have no peace at Longbourn if Lydia does not go to Brighton. Let her go then. Colonel Forster is a sensible man, and will keep her out of any real mischief; and she is luckily too poor to be an object of prey to any body. At Brighton she will be of less importance, even as a common flirt, than she has been here. The officers will find women better worth their notice. Let us hope, therefore, that her being there may teach her her own insignificance. At any rate, she cannot grow many degrees worse without authorizing us to lock her up for the rest of her life.''
With this answer Elizabeth was forced to be content; but her own opinion continued the same, and she left him disappointed and sorry. It was not in her nature, however, to increase her vexations by dwelling on them. She was confident of having performed her duty, and to fret over unavoidable evils, or augment them by anxiety, was no part of her disposition.
Had Lydia and her mother known the substance of her conference with her father, their indignation would hardly have found expression in their united volubility. In Lydia's imagination, a visit to Brighton comprised every possibility of earthly happiness. She saw, with the creative eye of fancy, the streets of that gay bathing place covered with officers. She saw herself the object of attention to tens and to scores of them at present unknown. She saw all the glories of the camp; its tents stretched forth in beauteous uniformity of lines, crowded with the young and the gay, and dazzling with scarlet; and to complete the view, she saw herself seated beneath a tent, tenderly flirting with at least six officers at once.
Had she known that her sister sought to tear her from such prospects and such realities as these, what would have been her sensations? They could have been understood only by her mother, who might have felt nearly the same. Lydia's going to Brighton was all that consoled her for the melancholy conviction of her husband's never intending to go there himself.
But they were entirely ignorant of what had passed; and their raptures continued, with little intermission, to the very day of Lydia's leaving home.
Elizabeth was now to see Mr. Wickham for the last time. Having been frequently in company with him since her return, agitation was pretty well over; the agitations of former partiality entirely so. She had even learnt to detect, in the very gentleness which had first delighted her, an affectation and a sameness to disgust and weary. In his present behaviour to herself, moreover, she had a fresh source of displeasure, for the inclination he soon testified of renewing those attentions which had marked the early part of their acquaintance could only serve, after what had since passed, to provoke her. She lost all concern for him in finding herself thus selected as the object of such idle and frivolous gallantry; and while she steadily repressed it, could not but feel the reproof contained in his believing that, however long, and for whatever cause, his attentions had been withdrawn, her vanity would be gratified and her preference secured at any time by their renewal.
On the very last day of the regiment's remaining in Meryton, he dined with others of the officers at Longbourn; and so little was Elizabeth disposed to part from him in good humour, that on his making some enquiry as to the manner in which her time had passed at Hunsford, she mentioned Colonel Fitzwilliam's and Mr. Darcy's having both spent three weeks at Rosings, and asked him if he were acquainted with the former.
He looked surprised, displeased, alarmed; but with a moment's recollection and a returning smile, replied that he had formerly seen him often; and after observing that he was a very gentlemanlike man, asked her how she had liked him. Her answer was warmly in his favour. With an air of indifference he soon afterwards added, ``How long did you say that he was at Rosings?''
``Nearly three weeks.''
``And you saw him frequently?''
``Yes, almost every day.''
``His manners are very different from his cousin's.''
``Yes, very different. But I think Mr. Darcy improves on acquaintance.''
``Indeed!'' cried Wickham with a look which did not escape her. ``And pray may I ask -- ?'' but checking himself, he added in a gayer tone, ``Is it in address that he improves? Has he deigned to add ought of civility to his ordinary style? for I dare not hope,'' he continued in a lower and more serious tone, ``that he is improved in essentials.''
``Oh, no!'' said Elizabeth. ``In essentials, I believe, he is very much what he ever was.''
While she spoke, Wickham looked as if scarcely knowing whether to rejoice over her words, or to distrust their meaning. There was a something in her countenance which made him listen with an apprehensive and anxious attention, while she added,
``When I said that he improved on acquaintance, I did not mean that either his mind or manners were in a state of improvement, but that from knowing him better, his disposition was better understood.''
Wickham's alarm now appeared in a heightened complexion and agitated look; for a few minutes he was silent; till, shaking off his embarrassment, he turned to her again, and said in the gentlest of accents,
``You, who so well know my feelings towards Mr. Darcy, will readily comprehend how sincerely I must rejoice that he is wise enough to assume even the appearance of what is right. His pride, in that direction, may be of service, if not to himself, to many others, for it must deter him from such foul misconduct as I have suffered by. I only fear that the sort of cautiousness, to which you, I imagine, have been alluding, is merely adopted on his visits to his aunt, of whose good opinion and judgment he stands much in awe. His fear of her has always operated, I know, when they were together; and a good deal is to be imputed to his wish of forwarding the match with Miss De Bourgh, which I am certain he has very much at heart.''
Elizabeth could not repress a smile at this, but she answered only by a slight inclination of the head. She saw that he wanted to engage her on the old subject of his grievances, and she was in no humour to indulge him. The rest of the evening passed with the appearance, on his side, of usual cheerfulness, but with no farther attempt to distinguish Elizabeth; and they parted at last with mutual civility, and possibly a mutual desire of never meeting again.
When the party broke up, Lydia returned with Mrs. Forster to Meryton, from whence they were to set out early the next morning. The separation between her and her family was rather noisy than pathetic. Kitty was the only one who shed tears; but she did weep from vexation and envy. Mrs. Bennet was diffuse in her good wishes for the felicity of her daughter, and impressive in her injunctions that she would not miss the opportunity of enjoying herself as much as possible; advice, which there was every reason to believe would be attended to; and in the clamorous happiness of Lydia herself in bidding farewell, the more gentle adieus of her sisters were uttered without being heard.她们回得家来，眨下眼睛就过了一个星期，现在已经开始过第二个星期。过了这个星 期，驻扎在麦里屯的那个民兵团就要开拔了，附近的年轻小姐们立刻一个个垂头丧气起来。 几乎处处都是心灰意冷的气象。只有班纳特家的两位大小姐照常饮食起居，照常各干各的 事。可是吉蒂和丽迪雅已经伤心到极点，便不由得常常责备两位姐姐冷淡无情。她们真不明 白，家里怎么竟会有这样没有心肝的人！
她们老是无限悲痛地嚷道：“老天爷呀！我们这一下还成个什么样子呢？你还好意思笑 得出来，丽萃？”她们那位慈祥的母亲也跟了她们一块儿伤心；她记起二十五年以前，自己 也是为着差不多同样的事情，忍受了多少苦痛。
她说：“我一点儿没记错，当初米勒上校那一团人调走的时候，我整整哭了两天。我简 直似碎了。”
“我相信我的心是一定要碎的，”丽迪雅说。
“要是我们能上白利屯去，那多么好！”班纳特太太说。
“对啊───如果能上白利屯去多么好！可是爸爸偏偏要作对。”
“洗一洗海水浴就会使我一辈子身体健康。”
“腓力普姨母也说，海水浴一定会对我的身体大有好处。”吉蒂接着说。
浪搏恩这家人家的两位小姐，就是这样没完没结地长吁短叹。伊丽莎白想把她们笑话一 番，可是羞耻心打消了她一切的情趣。她重新又想到达西先生的确没有冤枉她们，他指出她 们的那些缺陷确是事实，她深深感觉到，实在难怪他要干涉他朋友和吉英的好事。
但是丽迪雅的忧郁不多一会就烟消云散，因为弗斯脱团长的太太请她陪她一块儿到白利 屯去。这位贵友是位很年轻的夫人，新近才结婚的。她跟丽迪雅都是好兴致，好精神，因此 意气相投：虽然才只三个月的友谊，却已经做了两个月的知已。
丽迪雅这时候是怎样欢天喜地，她对于弗斯脱太太是怎样敬慕，班纳特太太又是怎样高 兴，吉蒂又是怎样难受，这些自然不在话下。在屋子里跳来蹦去，叫大家都来祝贺她，大笑 大叫，比往常闹得越发厉害；倒运的吉蒂却只能继续在小客厅里怨天尤命，怪三怪四。
“我不明白弗斯脱太太为什么不叫我和丽迪雅一同去，”她说，“即使我不是她特别要 好的朋友，又何妨也邀我一同去。照说我比她大两岁，面子也得大些呢。”
伊丽莎白把道理讲给她听，吉英也劝她不必生气，她都不理睬。再说伊丽莎白，她对于 这次邀请，完全不象她母亲和丽迪雅那样兴高采烈，她只觉得丽迪雅纵然还没有糊涂到那种 地步，这一去可算完全给毁了。于是她只得暗地里叫她父亲不许丽迪雅去，也顾不得事后让 丽迪雅知道了，会把她恨到什么地步。她把丽迪雅日常行为举止失检的地方，都告诉了父 亲，说明和弗斯脱太太这样一个女人做朋友毫无益处，跟这样的一个朋友到白利屯去，也许 会变得更荒唐，因为那边的诱惑力一定比这里大。父亲用心听她把话讲完，然后说道：
“丽迪雅非到公共场所之类的地方去出一出丑，是决不肯罢休的。她这次要去出丑，既 不必花家里的钱，又用不着家里麻烦，真难得有这样的机会呢。”
伊丽莎白说：“丽迪雅那样轻浮冒失，一定会引起外人注目，会使我们姐妹吃她的大亏 ──事实上已经吃了很大的亏──你要是想到了这一点，那你对这桩事的看法就会两样 了。”
“已经使你们吃了大亏！”班纳特先生重复了一遍。“这话怎么说：她把你们的爱人吓 跑了不成？可怜的小丽萃呀，甭担心。那些经不起一点儿小风浪的挑三剔四的小伙子。因为 看见了丽迪雅的放荡行为，而不敢向你们问津？”
“你完全弄错了我的意思。我并不是因为吃了亏才来埋怨。我也说不出我究竟是在埋怨 哪一种害处，只觉得害处很多。丽迪雅这种放荡不羁、无法无天的性格，确实对我们体面攸 关，一定会影响到我们的社会地位。我说话爽直，千万要请你原谅。好爸爸，你得想办法管 教管教她这种撒野的脾气，叫她明白，不能够一辈子都这样到处追逐，否则她马上就要无可 救药了。一旦她的性格定型以后，就难得改过来。她才不过十六岁，就成了一个十足的浪荡 女子，弄得她自己和家庭都惹人笑话，而且她还轻佻浪荡到极端下贱无耻的地步。她只不过 年纪还轻，略有几分姿色，此外就一无可取。她愚昧无知，头脑糊涂，只知道搏得别人爱 慕，结果到处叫人看不起。吉蒂也有这种危险。丽迪雅要她东就东，西就西。她既无知，又 爱虚荣，生性又懒惰，完全是没有一点家教的样子！哎哟，我的好爸爸呀，她们随便走到什 么地方，只要有人认识她们，她们就会受人指责，受人轻视，还时常连累到她们的姐姐们也 丢脸，难道你还以为不会这样吗？”
班纳特先生看到她钻进了牛角尖，便慈祥地握住她扔手说：
“好孩子，放心好了。你和吉英两个人，随便走到什么有熟人的地方，人家都会尊敬你 们，器重你们；你们决不会因为有了两个──甚至三个傻妹妹，就失掉了体面。这次要是不 让丽迪雅到白利屯去，我们在浪搏恩就休想安静。还是让她去吧。弗斯脱上校是个有见识的 人，不会让她闯出什么祸事来的；幸亏她又太穷，谁也不会看中她。白利屯跟这儿的情形两 样，她即使去做一个普通的浪荡女子，也不够资格。军官们会找到更中意的对象。因此，我 们但愿她到了那儿以后，可以得到些教训，知道她自己没有什么了不起。无论如何，她再坏 也坏不到哪里去，我们总不能把她一辈子关在家里。”
伊丽莎白听到父亲这样回答，虽然并没有因此改变主张，却也只得表示满意，闷闷不乐 地走开了。以她那样性格的人，也不会尽想着这些事自寻烦恼。她相信她已经尽了自己的责 任，至于要她为那些无法避免的害处去忧闷，或者是过分焦虑，那她可办不到。
倘若丽迪雅和她母亲知道她这次跟父亲谈话的内容，她们一定要气死了，即使她们两张 利嘴同时夹攻，滔滔不绝地大骂一阵，也还消不了她们的气。在丽迪雅的想象中，只要到白 利屯去一次，人间天上的幸福都会获得。她幻想着在那华丽的浴场附近，一条条街道上都挤 满了军官。她幻想着几十个甚至几百个素昧生平的军官，都对她献殷勤。她幻想着堂皇富丽 的营帐，帐幕整洁美观，里面挤满了血气方刚的青年小伙子，都穿着灿烂夺目的大红军服。 她还幻想到一幅最美满的情景，幻想到自己坐在一个帐篷里面，同时跟好多个军官在柔情密 意地卖弄风情。
倘若她知道了她姐姐竟要妨害她，不让她去享受到这些美妙的远景和美妙的现实，那叫 她怎么受得了？只有她母亲才能体谅她这种心境，而且几乎和她有同感。她相信丈夫决不打 算到白利屯去，她感到很痛苦，因此，丽迪雅能够去一次，对她这种痛苦实在是莫大的安 慰。
可是她们母女俩完全不知道这回事，因此，到丽迪雅离家的那一天为止，她们一直都是 欢天喜地，没有受到半点儿磨难。
现在轮到伊丽莎白和韦翰先生最后一次会面了。她自从回家以后，已经见过他不少次， 因此不安的情绪早就消失了；她曾经为了从前对他有过情意而感到不安，这种情绪现在更是 消失得无影无踪。他以前曾以风度文雅而搏得过她的欢心，现在她看出了这里面的虚伪做 作，陈腔滥调，觉得十分厌恶。他目前对待她的态度，又造成了她不愉快的一个新的根源； 他不久就流露出要跟她重温旧好的意思，殊不知经过了那一番冷暖之后，却只会使她生气。 她发觉要跟她谈情说爱的这个人，竟是一个游手好闲的轻薄公子，因此就不免对他心灰意 冷；而他居然还自以为只要能够重温旧好，便终究能够满足她的虚荣，获得她的欢心，不管 他已经有多久没有向她献过殷勤，其中又是为了什么原因，都不会对事情本身发生任何影 响。她看到他那种神气，虽然表面上忍住了气不作声，可是心里却正在对他骂不绝口。
民团离开麦里屯的前一天，他跟别的一些军官们都到浪搏恩来吃饭；他问起伊丽莎白在 汉斯福那一段日子是怎么度过的，伊丽莎白为了不愿意和他好声好气地分手，便趁机提起费 茨威廉上校和达西先生都在罗新斯消磨了三个星期，而且还问他认不认识费茨威廉。他顿时 气急败坏，大惊失色，可是稍许镇定了一下以后，他便笑嘻嘻地回答她说，以前常常见到他 的。他说费茨威廉是个很有绅士风度的人，又问她喜欢不喜欢他。她热情地回答他说，很喜 欢他。他立刻又带着一副满不在乎的神气说道：“你刚刚说他在罗新斯待了多久？”
“差不多有三个星期。”
“你常常和他见面吗？”
“常常见面，差不多每天见面。”
“他的风度和他表兄大不相同。”
“的确大不相同；可是我想，达西先生跟人家处熟了也就好了。”
只见韦翰顿时显出吃惊的神气，大声嚷道：“那可怪啦，对不起，我是否可以请问你一 下──”说到这里，他又控制住了自己，把说话的声调变得愉快些，然而接下去说：“他跟 人家说话时，语气是否好了些？他待人接物是否比以前有礼貌些？因为我实在不敢指望他─ ─”他的声调低下去了，变得更严肃了，“指望他从本质上变好过。”
“没那回事！”伊丽莎白说。“我相信他的本质还是和过去一样。”
韦翰听到她这一番话，不知道应该表示高兴，还是应该表示不相信。韦翰见她说话时脸 上有种形容不出的表情，心中不免有些害怕和焦急。她又接下去说：
“我所谓达西先生跟人处熟了也就好了，并不是说他的思想和态度会变好，而是说，你 同他处得愈熟，你就愈了解他的个性。”
韦翰一听此话，不禁心慌起来，顿时便红了脸，神情也十分不安。他沉默了好几分钟以 后，才收敛住了那股窘相，转过身来对着她，用极其温和的声调说：
“你很了解我心里对达西先生是怎样一种感觉，因此你也很容易明白：我听到他居然也 懂得在表面上装得象个样子了，这叫我多么高兴。那种骄傲即使对他自己没有什么益处，对 别人也许倒有好处，因为他既有这种骄傲，就不会有那种恶劣行为，使我吃了那么大的亏 了。我只怕他虽然收敛了一些（你大概就是说他比较收敛了一些吧）事实上只不过为了要在 他姨母面前做幌子，让他姨母看得起他，说他的好话。我很明白，每逢他和他姨母在一起的 时候，他就免不了战战兢兢，这多半是为了想和德・包尔小姐结婚，这敢说，这是他念念不 忘的一件大事。”
伊丽莎白听到这些话，不由得微微一笑，她只稍微点了一下头，并没有做声。她看出他 又想在她面前把那个老问题拿出来发一通牢骚，她可没有兴致去怂恿他。这个晚上就这样过 去了，他表面上还是装得象平常一样高兴，可没有打算再逢迎伊丽莎白；最后他们客客气气 地分了手，也许双方都希望永远不再见面了。
他们分手以后，丽迪雅便跟弗斯脱太太回到麦里屯去，他们打算明天一早从那儿动身。 丽迪雅和家里分别的时候，与其说是有什么离愁别恨，还不如说是热闹了一场。只有吉蒂流 了眼泪，可是她这一场哭泣却是为了烦恼和嫉妒。班纳特太太口口声声祝她女儿幸福，又千 叮万嘱地叫她不要错过了及时行乐的机会───这种嘱咐，女儿当然会去遵命办理；她得意 非凡地对家里人大声叫着再会，于是姐妹们低声细气地祝她一路平安的话，她听也没有听 见。

<- ->