
Chapter XIX of Volume II (Chap. 42)
 HAD Elizabeth's opinion been all drawn from her own family, she could not have formed a very pleasing picture of conjugal felicity or domestic comfort. Her father, captivated by youth and beauty, and that appearance of good humour which youth and beauty generally give, had married a woman whose weak understanding and illiberal mind had, very early in their marriage, put an end to all real affection for her. Respect, esteem, and confidence had vanished for ever; and all his views of domestic happiness were overthrown. But Mr. Bennet was not of a disposition to seek comfort, for the disappointment which his own imprudence had brought on, in any of those pleasures which too often console the unfortunate for their folly or their vice. He was fond of the country and of books; and from these tastes had arisen his principal enjoyments. To his wife he was very little otherwise indebted, than as her ignorance and folly had contributed to his amusement. This is not the sort of happiness which a man would in general wish to owe to his wife; but where other powers of entertainment are wanting, the true philosopher will derive benefit from such as are given.
Elizabeth, however, had never been blind to the impropriety of her father's behaviour as a husband. She had always seen it with pain; but respecting his abilities, and grateful for his affectionate treatment of herself, she endeavoured to forget what she could not overlook, and to banish from her thoughts that continual breach of conjugal obligation and decorum which, in exposing his wife to the contempt of her own children, was so highly reprehensible. But she had never felt so strongly as now the disadvantages which must attend the children of so unsuitable a marriage, nor ever been so fully aware of the evils arising from so ill-judged a direction of talents; talents which rightly used, might at least have preserved the respectability of his daughters, even if incapable of enlarging the mind of his wife.
When Elizabeth had rejoiced over Wickham's departure, she found little other cause for satisfaction in the loss of the regiment. Their parties abroad were less varied than before; and at home she had a mother and sister whose constant repinings at the dulness of every thing around them threw a real gloom over their domestic circle; and, though Kitty might in time regain her natural degree of sense, since the disturbers of her brain were removed, her other sister, from whose disposition greater evil might be apprehended, was likely to be hardened in all her folly and assurance by a situation of such double danger as a watering place and a camp. Upon the whole, therefore, she found what has been sometimes found before, that an event to which she had looked forward with impatient desire, did not, in taking place, bring all the satisfaction she had promised herself. It was consequently necessary to name some other period for the commencement of actual felicity; to have some other point on which her wishes and hopes might be fixed, and by again enjoying the pleasure of anticipation, console herself for the present, and prepare for another disappointment. Her tour to the Lakes was now the object of her happiest thoughts; it was her best consolation for all the uncomfortable hours which the discontentedness of her mother and Kitty made inevitable; and could she have included Jane in the scheme, every part of it would have been perfect.
``But it is fortunate,'' thought she, ``that I have something to wish for. Were the whole arrangement complete, my disappointment would be certain. But here, by my carrying with me one ceaseless source of regret in my sister's absence, I may reasonably hope to have all my expectations of pleasure realized. A scheme of which every part promises delight, can never be successful; and general disappointment is only warded off by the defence of some little peculiar vexation.''
When Lydia went away, she promised to write very often and very minutely to her mother and Kitty; but her letters were always long expected, and always very short. Those to her mother contained little else, than that they were just returned from the library, where such and such officers had attended them, and where she had seen such beautiful ornaments as made her quite wild; that she had a new gown, or a new parasol, which she would have described more fully, but was obliged to leave off in a violent hurry, as Mrs. Forster called her, and they were going to the camp; -- and from her correspondence with her sister, there was still less to be learnt -- for her letters to Kitty, though rather longer, were much too full of lines under the words to be made public.
After the first fortnight or three weeks of her absence, health, good humour, and cheerfulness began to re-appear at Longbourn. Everything wore a happier aspect. The families who had been in town for the winter came back again, and summer finery and summer engagements arose. Mrs. Bennet was restored to her usual querulous serenity, and by the middle of June Kitty was so much recovered as to be able to enter Meryton without tears; an event of such happy promise as to make Elizabeth hope that by the following Christmas, she might be so tolerably reasonable as not to mention an officer above once a day, unless, by some cruel and malicious arrangement at the War-Office, another regiment should be quartered in Meryton.
The time fixed for the beginning of their Northern tour was now fast approaching; and a fortnight only was wanting of it, when a letter arrived from Mrs. Gardiner, which at once delayed its commencement and curtailed its extent. Mr. Gardiner would be prevented by business from setting out till a fortnight later in July, and must be in London again within a month; and as that left too short a period for them to go so far, and see so much as they had proposed, or at least to see it with the leisure and comfort they had built on, they were obliged to give up the Lakes, and substitute a more contracted tour; and, according to the present plan, were to go no farther northward than Derbyshire. In that county, there was enough to be seen to occupy the chief of their three weeks; and to Mrs. Gardiner it had a peculiarly strong attraction. The town where she had formerly passed some years of her life, and where they were now to spend a few days, was probably as great an object of her curiosity, as all the celebrated beauties of Matlock, Chatsworth, Dovedale, or the Peak.
Elizabeth was excessively disappointed; she had set her heart on seeing the Lakes; and still thought there might have been time enough. But it was her business to be satisfied -- and certainly her temper to be happy; and all was soon right again.
With the mention of Derbyshire, there were many ideas connected. It was impossible for her to see the word without thinking of Pemberley and its owner. ``But surely,'' said she, ``I may enter his county with impunity, and rob it of a few petrified spars without his perceiving me.''
The period of expectation was now doubled. Four weeks were to pass away before her uncle and aunt's arrival. But they did pass away, and Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner, with their four children, did at length appear at Longbourn. The children, two girls of six and eight years old, and two younger boys, were to be left under the particular care of their cousin Jane, who was the general favourite, and whose steady sense and sweetness of temper exactly adapted her for attending to them in every way -- teaching them, playing with them, and loving them.
The Gardiners staid only one night at Longbourn, and set off the next morning with Elizabeth in pursuit of novelty and amusement. One enjoyment was certain -- that of suitableness as companions; a suitableness which comprehended health and temper to bear inconveniences -- cheerfulness to enhance every pleasure -- and affection and intelligence, which might supply it among themselves if there were disappointments abroad.
It is not the object of this work to give a description of Derbyshire, nor of any of the remarkable places through which their route thither lay; Oxford, Blenheim, Warwick, Kenelworth, Birmingham, &c. are sufficiently known. A small part of Derbyshire is all the present concern. To the little town of Lambton, the scene of Mrs. Gardiner's former residence, and where she had lately learned that some acquaintance still remained, they bent their steps, after having seen all the principal wonders of the country; and within five miles of Lambton, Elizabeth found from her aunt that Pemberley was situated. It was not in their direct road, nor more than a mile or two out of it. In talking over their route the evening before, Mrs. Gardiner expressed an inclination to see the place again. Mr. Gardiner declared his willingness, and Elizabeth was applied to for her approbation.
``My love, should not you like to see a place of which you have heard so much?'' said her aunt. ``A place too, with which so many of your acquaintance are connected. Wickham passed all his youth there, you know.''
Elizabeth was distressed. She felt that she had no business at Pemberley, and was obliged to assume a disinclination for seeing it. She must own that she was tired of great houses; after going over so many, she really had no pleasure in fine carpets or satin curtains.
Mrs. Gardiner abused her stupidity. ``If it were merely a fine house richly furnished,'' said she, ``I should not care about it myself; but the grounds are delightful. They have some of the finest woods in the country.''
Elizabeth said no more -- but her mind could not acquiesce. The possibility of meeting Mr. Darcy, while viewing the place, instantly occurred. It would be dreadful! She blushed at the very idea; and thought it would be better to speak openly to her aunt than to run such a risk. But against this there were objections; and she finally resolved that it could be the last resource, if her private enquiries as to the absence of the family were unfavourably answered.
Accordingly, when she retired at night, she asked the chambermaid whether Pemberley were not a very fine place, what was the name of its proprietor, and, with no little alarm, whether the family were down for the summer. A most welcome negative followed the last question -- and her alarms being now removed, she was at leisure to feel a great deal of curiosity to see the house herself; and when the subject was revived the next morning, and she was again applied to, could readily answer, and with a proper air of indifference, that she had not really any dislike to the scheme.
To Pemberley, therefore, they were to go.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME倘若叫伊丽莎白根据她自己家庭的情形，来说一说什么叫做婚姻的幸福，什么叫做家庭 的乐趣，那她一定说不出好话来。她父亲当年就因为贪恋青春美貌，为的是青春美貌往往会 给人带来很大的情趣，因此娶了这样一个智力贫乏而又小心眼儿的女人，结婚不久，他对太 太的深挚的情意便完结了。夫妇之间的互敬互爱和推心置腹，都永远消失得无影无踪；他对 于家庭幸福的理想也完全给推翻了。换了别的人，凡是因为自己的冒失而招来了不幸，往往 会用荒唐或是不正当的佚乐来安慰自己，可是班纳特先生却不喜欢这一套。他喜爱乡村景 色，喜爱读书自娱，这就是他最大的乐趣。说到他的太太，除了她的无知和愚蠢倒可以供他 开心作乐之外，他对她就再没有别的恩情了。一般男人照理总不希望在妻子身上找这一种乐 趣，可是大智大慧的人既然没有本领去找别的玩艺儿，当然只好听天由命。
不过伊丽莎白并不是看不出父亲的缺德。她老是一看到就觉得痛苦；可是她尊重他的才 能，又感谢他对读书的宠爱，因此，本来忽略不了的地方，她也尽量把它忽略过去，而且纵 使父亲大不该叫孩子们看不起妈妈，以致使他们老夫妇一天比一天不能够互敬互爱地相处， 她也尽量不去想它。但是，说到不美满的婚姻给儿女们带来的不利，她从前决没有象现在体 验得这样深刻，父亲的才能使用不得当因而造成种种害处，这一点她从来没有象现在这样看 得透彻。要是父亲的才能运用得适当，即使不能够扩展母亲的见识，至少也可以保存女儿们 的体面。
韦翰走了固然使伊丽莎白感到快慰，然而，这个民兵团开拔以后，并没有什么别的地方 叫她满意。外面的宴会不象以前那样多那样有趣了，在家里又是成天只听到母亲和妹妹口口 声声埋怨生活沉闷，使家里笼罩上了一层阴影；至于吉蒂虽说那些闹得她心猿意马的人已经 走了，她不久就会恢复常态；可是还有那另外一个妹妹，秉性本就不好，加上现在又处身在 那兵营和浴场的双重危险的环境里，自然会更加大胆放荡，闯出更大的祸事来，因此从大体 上说来，她发觉到（其实以前有一度她早就发觉到）她眼巴巴望着到来的一件事，等到真正 到来了，总不象她预期的那么满意。因此她不得不把真正幸福的开端期诸来日，找些别的东 西来寄托她的希望和心愿，在期待的心情中自我陶醉一番，暂时安慰自己一下，准备再遭受 到失望。她现在心里最得意的一件事便是不久就可以到湖区去旅行，因为既然母亲和吉蒂心 里不快活，吵得家里鸡犬不宁，当然一想起出门便使她获得了最大的安慰；如果吉英也能参 加这次旅行，那就十全十美了。
她心里想：“总还算幸运，我还可以存些指望。假使处处都安排得很完满，我反面要感 到失望了。姐姐不能够一同去，我自会时时刻刻都感到遗憾，不过也反而可以使我存着一分 希望，因此我所期待的愉快也可能会实现。十全十美的计划总不会成功；只有稍许带着几分 苦恼，才可以大体上防止得了失望。”
丽迪雅临走的时候，答应常常给母亲和吉蒂写信来，详详细细地告诉她们一路上的情 形，可是她走了以后，家里老是等了好久才接到她一封信，而每封信又往往只是寥寥数行。 她给她母亲写的那些信，无非说说她们刚刚从图书馆回来，有许多军官们陪着她们一起去， 她们在那里看到许多漂亮的装饰品，使她眼红极了，或者说是她买了一件新的长衣服，一把 阳伞，她本来可以把这些东西详详细细描写一番，可是弗斯脱太太在叫她了，她们马上就要 到兵营去，等等。至于她写给吉蒂的信，虽然要长得多，可是也很空洞，因为有许多重要的 话不便写出来。
她走了两三个星期以后，浪搏恩又重新恢复了愉快欢乐的气象。一切都欣欣向荣。上城 里过冬的那些人家都搬回来了，人们都穿起了夏天的新装，到处是夏天的约会。班纳特太太 又象往常一样动不动就发牢骚。到了六月中旬吉蒂完全恢复了常态，到麦里屯去可以不掉眼 泪了，伊丽莎白看到真高兴，她希望到了圣诞节，吉蒂会变得相当有理智，不至于每天三番 五次地提到军官们，除非作战部不管人家死活，又来一次恶作剧，重新调一团人驻扎到麦里 屯来。
他们北上旅行的日期已经迫近，只剩下两个星期了，不料这时候嘉丁纳太太却寄来了一 封信，使行期耽搁下来，旅行范围也得缩小。信上说，因为嘉丁纳先生有事，行期必须延迟 两个星期，到七月里才能动身，又因为他只能出外旅行一个月便得回到伦敦，日期很短促， 不能照原来的计划作长途旅行，饱餐山川景色，至少不能照原来所安排的那样悠闲自在地去 游览，湖区必须放弃，旅程必须缩短，只能到德比郡为止。其实德比郡就足够供他们游览， 足够他们消磨短短三星期的旅行日程，而且嘉丁纳太太非常向往那个地方。她以前曾在那儿 住过儿年，现在能够旧地重游，盘桓数日，便不禁对于马特洛克、恰滋华斯、鸽谷、秀阜的 风景名胜，心醉神往。
这封信使伊丽莎白非常失望。她本来一心想去观赏湖区风光，到现在还觉得时间很充 裕。不过，她既没有权利可以反对，她的心境又很洒脱，不多一会，便又觉得好受了。一提 到德比郡，就免不了勾起多少联想。她看到这个地名，就不禁想到彭伯里和彭伯里的主人。 她说：“我一定可以大摇大摆地走进他的故乡，趁他不知不觉的时候，攫取几块透明的晶 石。”
行期一延再延。舅父母还得过四个星期才能来。可是四个星期毕竟过去了，嘉丁纳夫妇 终于带着他们的四个孩子来到浪搏恩。四个孩子中间有两个女孩子，一个六岁，一个八岁， 另外两个男孩子年纪还小。孩子们都将留在这儿，由他们的表姐吉英照管，因为他们都喜欢 吉英，加上吉英举止稳重，性情柔和，无论是教孩子们读书，跟他们游戏，以及照顾他们， 都非常适合。
嘉丁纳夫妇只在浪搏恩住了一夜，第二天一大早就带着伊丽莎白去探新求异，寻欢作 乐。这几个旅伴确实非常适当，所谓适当，就是说大家身体健壮，性子柔和，路上遇到不方 便的地方可以忍受得了，这实在叫人称心如意。他们一个个都生气勃勃，这自然可以促进愉 快，而且他们感情丰富，人又聪明，万一在外地碰到了什么扫兴的事情，互相之间仍然可以 过得很快活。
本书不打算详细描写德比郡怕风光，至于他们的旅程所必须经过的一些名胜地区，例如 牛津、布楞恩、沃里克、凯尼尔沃思、伯明翰等，大家都知道得够多了，也不打算写。现在 只讲一讲德比郡的一小部分。且说有个小镇名叫蓝白屯，嘉丁纳夫妇从前曾在那儿住过，她 最近听说还有些熟人依旧住在那边，于是看完了乡间的一切名胜古迹之后，便绕道到那儿去 看看。伊丽莎白听见舅母说，离开蓝白屯不到五英里路就是彭伯里，虽然不是路过必经之 处，可是也不过弯了一两英里路。前一个晚上讨论旅程的时候，嘉丁纳太太说是想到那边再 去看看。嘉丁纳先生表示愿意，于是他们便来征求伊丽莎白同意。
舅母对她说：“亲爱的，那个地方你是久闻大名的，愿意去看看吗？你的许多朋友都跟 那地方有关系。韦翰的整个少年时代都是在那儿度过的，你知道。”
伊丽莎白给说得窘极了。她觉得不必到彭伯里去，便只得说不想去。她但说高楼大厦、 锦绣帏，已经见识得够多了，实在无意再去浏览
嘉丁纳太太骂她蠢，她说：“要是光光只有一幢富丽堂皇的房子，我也不会把它摆在心 上；可是那儿的放置庭园景色实在可爱，那儿的树木是全国最美丽的树林。”
伊丽莎白不做声了，可是她心里依旧不敢赞同。她立刻想到，如果到那儿去欣赏风景， 很可能碰到达西先生，那多糟糕！她想到这里就羞红了脸，自以为还不如把事情跟舅母开诚 布公地说个明白，免得要担这么大的风险。可是这也不妥当；也最后决定先去暗地打听一下 达西先生家里有没有人，如果有人，那么，她再来用最后一着还不为迟。
晚上临睡的时候，她便向待女打听彭伯里地方好不好，主人姓甚名谁，又心惊胆战地问 起主人家是否要回来消暑。她这最后一问，竟得到了她所求之不得的回答：他们不回来。她 现在用不到再怕什么了，可是又逐渐产生了极大的好奇心，想亲眼去看看那幢房子；第二天 早上旧话重提，舅母又来征求她的同意，她便带着一副毫不在乎的神气马上回答说，她对于 这个计划没有什么不赞成，于是他们就决计上彭伯里去了。

<- ->