
Chapter VI of Volume II
 MR. Collins's triumph in consequence of this invitation was complete. The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wondering visitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and his wife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of Lady Catherine's condescension as he knew not how to admire enough.
``I confess,'' said he, ``that I should not have been at all surprised by her Ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening at Rosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that it would happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there (an invitation moreover including the whole party) so immediately after your arrival!''
``I am the less surprised at what has happened,'' replied Sir William, ``from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the Court, such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.''
Scarcely any thing was talked of the whole day, or next morning, but their visit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a dinner might not wholly overpower them.
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth,
``Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us, which becomes herself and daughter. I would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest, there is no occasion for any thing more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rank preserved.''
While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their different doors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very much objected to be kept waiting for her dinner. -- Such formidable accounts of her ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucas, who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her introduction at Rosings with as much apprehension, as her father had done to his presentation at St. James's.
As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park. -- Every park has its beauty and its prospects; and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Lewis De Bourgh.
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was every moment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm. -- Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money and rank she thought she could witness without trepidation.
From the entrance hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine proportion and finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. -- Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins had settled it with her husband that the office of introduction should be her's, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.
In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word; and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before her composedly. -- Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-marked features, which might once have been handsome. Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her visitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable by silence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly what he had represented.
When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter, she could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment at her being so thin, and so small. There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies. Miss De Bourgh was pale and sickly; her features, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke very little, except in a low voice to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes.
After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer.
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants, and all the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnish nothing greater. -- He carved, and ate, and praised with delighted alacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him, and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son in law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear. But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between Charlotte and Miss De Bourgh -- the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her all dinner time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Miss De Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearing she were indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.
When the ladies returned to the drawing room, there was little to be done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to have her judgment controverted. She enquired into Charlotte's domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, and gave her a great deal of advice as to the management of them all; told her how every thing ought to be regulated in so small a family as her's, and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady's attention, which could furnish her with an occasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew the least, and who, she observed to Mrs. Collins, was a very genteel, pretty kind of girl. She asked her at different times, how many sisters she had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been her mother's maiden name? -- Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions, but answered them very composedly. -- Lady Catherine then observed,
``Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For your sake,'' turning to Charlotte, ``I am glad of it; but otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line. -- It was not thought necessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. -- Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?''
``A little.''
``Oh! then -- some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to -- You shall try it some day. -- Do your sisters play and sing?''
``One of them does.''
``Why did not you all learn? -- You ought all to have learned. The Miss Webbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as your's. -- Do you draw?''
``No, not at all.''
``What, none of you?''
``Not one.''
``That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.''
``My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.''
``Has your governess left you?''
``We never had any governess.''
``No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at home without a governess! -- I never heard of such a thing. Your mother must have been quite a slave to your education.''
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling, as she assured her that had not been the case.
``Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess you must have been neglected.''
``Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us as wished to learn, never wanted the means. We were always encouraged to read, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to be idle, certainly might.''
``Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I had known your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engage one. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It is wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that way. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; and it was but the other day that I recommended another young person, who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe's calling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. "Lady Catherine," said she, "you have given me a treasure." Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?''
``Yes, Ma'am, all.''
``All! -- What, all five out at once? Very odd! -- And you only the second. -- The younger ones out before the elder are married! -- Your younger sisters must be very young?''
``Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps she is full young to be much in company. But really, Ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters, that they should not have their share of society and amusement because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early. -- The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth, as the first. And to be kept back on such a motive! -- I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.''
``Upon my word,'' said her ladyship, ``you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person. -- Pray, what is your age?''
``With three younger sisters grown up,'' replied Elizabeth smiling, ``your Ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.''
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer; and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence!
``You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, -- therefore you need not conceal your age.''
``I am not one and twenty.''
When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card tables were placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins sat down to quadrille; and as Miss De Bourgh chose to play at cassino, the two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed her fears of Miss De Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, or having too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at the other table, Lady Catherine was generally speaking -- stating the mistakes of the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collins was employed in agreeing to every thing her Ladyship said, thanking her for every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many. Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names.
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose, the tables were broke up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins, gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered. The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they were to have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach, and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins's side, and as many bows on Sir William's, they departed. As soon as they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, for Charlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But her commendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise into his own hands.罗新斯这一次请客，真使得柯林斯先生感到百分之百地得意。他本来一心要让这些好奇 的宾客们去风光一下他那女施主的堂皇气派，看看老夫人对待他们夫妇俩多么礼貌周全。他 竟会这么快就得到了如愿以偿的机会，这件事大足以说明咖苔琳夫人的礼贤下士，使得他不 知如何景仰是好。
“说老实话，”他说，“她老人家邀请我们星期日去吃茶点，在罗新斯消磨一个下午， 我一点儿也不觉得意外。她一贯为人殷勤，我倒以为她真要这样招待一番的，可是谁料想到 会象这次这样情意隆重？谁会想到你们刚刚到这里在，就被请到那边去吃饭（而且全体都请 到了）？”
威廉爵士说：“刚才的事我倒不怎么觉得稀奇，大人物的为人处世实在都是如此，象我 这样有身份的人，就见识得很多。在显宦贵族们当中，这类风雅好客的事不足为奇。”
这一整天和第二天上午，简直只谈到去罗新斯的事。柯林斯先生预先仔仔细细地一样样 告诉他们，到那边去将要看到什么东西，免得他们看到了那样宏伟的屋子，那样众多的仆 从，那样丰盛的菜肴，会造成临时慌乱，手足失措。
当娘儿们正要各自去打扮的时候，他又对伊丽莎白说：
“不要为衣装担心思，亲爱的表妹。咖苔琳夫人才不会要我们穿得华丽呢，这只有她自 己和她的女儿才配。我劝你只要在你自己的衣服里面，拣一件出色的穿上就行，不必过于讲 究。珈苔琳夫人决不会因为你衣装朴素就瞧你不起。她喜欢各人守着自己的本份，分得出一 个高低。”
娘儿们整装的时候，他又到各个人的房门口去了两三次，劝她们快一点，因为咖苔琳夫 人请人吃饭最恨客人迟到。玛丽亚・卢卡斯听说她老人家的为人处事这样可怕，不由得吓了 一跳，因为她一向不大会应酬。她一想起要到罗新斯去拜望，就诚惶诚恐，正如她父亲当年 进宫觐见一样。
天朗气清，他们穿过花园，作了一次差不多半英里的愉快的散步。一家家的花园都各有 美妙，伊丽莎白纵目观赏，心旷神怡，可是并不如柯林斯先生所预期的那样，会被眼前的景 色陶醉得乐而忘形。尽管他数着屋前一扇扇窗户说，光是这些玻璃，当初曾一共花了刘威 斯・德・包尔爵士多大一笔钱，她可并不为这些话动心。
他们踏上台阶走进穿堂的时候，玛丽亚一分钟比一分钟来得惶恐，连威廉爵士也不能完 全保持镇定。倒是伊丽莎白不畏缩。无论是论才论德，她都没有听到咖苔琳夫人有什么了不 起的地方足以引起她敬畏，光凭着有钱有势，还不会叫她见到了就胆战心惊。
进了穿堂，柯林斯先生就带着一副喜极欲狂的神气，指出这屋子的堂皇富丽，然后由佣 人们带着客人走过前厅，来到咖苔琳夫人母女和姜金生太太的起坐间。夫人极其谦和地站起 身来迎接他们。根据柯林斯太太事先跟她丈夫商量好的办法，当场由太太出面替宾主介绍， 因此介绍得很得体，凡是柯林斯先生认为必不可少的那些道歉和感激的话，都一概免了。
威廉爵士虽说当年也曾进宫觐见过皇上，可是看到四周围这般的富贵气派，也不禁完全 给吓住了，只得弯腰一躬，一声不响，坐了下来；再说他的女儿，简直吓得丧魂失魄一般， 兀自坐在椅子边上，眼睛也不知道往哪里看才好。伊丽莎白倒是完全安然自若，而且从容不 迫地细细瞧着那三位女主人。咖苔琳夫人是位高大的妇人，五官清楚，也许年轻时很好看。 她的样子并不十分客气，接待宾客的态度也不能使宾客忘却自己身份的低微。她吓人的地方 倒不是默不作声，而是她出言吐语时声调总是那么高高在上，自命不凡，这叫伊丽莎白立刻 想起了韦翰先生的话。经过这一整天的察言观色之后，她觉得咖苔琳夫人的为人，果然和韦 翰所形容的完全一样。
她仔细打量了她一眼，立刻就发觉她的容貌有些象达西先生，然后她就把目光转到她的 女儿身上，见她女儿长得那么单薄，那么瘦小，这使她几乎和玛丽亚一样感到惊奇。母女二 人无论体态面貌，都没有相似之处。德・包尔小姐脸色苍白、满面病容，五官虽然长得不算 难看，可是并不起眼；她不大说话，除非是低声跟姜金生太太嘀咕几句。姜金生太太的相貌 没有一点特出的地方，她只是全神贯注地听着小姐说话，并且挡在她面前，不让人家把她看 得太清楚。
坐了几分钟以后，客人们都被打发到窗口去欣赏外面的风景。柯林斯先生陪着他们，一 处处指给他们看，咖苔琳夫人和善地告诉他们说，到了夏天还要好看。酒席果然特别体面， 待候的仆从以及盛酒菜的器皿，也跟柯林斯先生所形容过的一模一样，而且正如他事先所料 到的那样，夫人果然吩咐他坐在末席，看他那副神气，好象人生没有比这更得意的事了。他 边切边吃，又兴致淋漓地赞不绝口；每一道菜都由他先来夸奖，然后由威廉爵士加以吹嘘， 原来威廉爵士现在已经完全消除了惊恐，可以做他女婿的应声虫了。伊丽莎白看到那种样 子，不禁担心咖苔琳夫人怎么受得了。可是咖苔琳夫人对这些过分的赞扬好象倒非常满意， 总是显露出仁慈的微笑，尤其是端上一道客人们没见过的菜到桌上来的时候，她便格外得 意。宾主们都没有什么可谈的，伊丽莎白却只要别人开个头，总还有话可说，可惜她坐的地 方不对头，一边是夏绿蒂，她正在用心听咖苔琳夫人谈话；另一边是德・包尔小姐，整个吃 饭时间不跟她说一句话。姜金生太太主要在注意德・包尔小姐，她看到小姐东西吃得太少， 便逼着她吃了这样再吃那样，又怕她不受用。玛丽亚根本不想讲话，男客们只顾一边吃一边 赞美。
女客们回到会客室以后，只是听咖苔琳夫人谈话。夫人滔滔不绝地一直谈到咖啡端上来 为止，随便谈到哪一桩事，她总是那么斩钉截铁、不许别人反对的样子。她毫不客气地仔细 问着夏绿蒂的家常，又给她提供了一大堆关于料理家务的意见。她告诉夏绿蒂说，象她这样 的一个小家庭，一切事情都应该精密安排，又指教她如何照料母牛和家禽。伊丽莎白发觉这 位贵妇人只要有机会支配别人，随便怎么小的事情也决不肯轻易放过。夫人同柯林斯太太谈 话的时候，也间或向玛丽亚和伊丽莎白问几句话，特别向伊丽莎白问得多。她不大清楚伊丽 莎白和她们是什么关系，不过她对柯林斯太太说，她是个很斯文、很标致的姑娘。她好几次 问伊丽莎白有几个姐妹，她们比她大还是比她小，她们中间有没有哪一个已经结婚，她们长 得好看不好看，在哪里读书，她们的父亲有什么样的马车，她母亲的娘家姓什么。伊丽莎白 觉得她这些话问得唐突，不过还是心平气和地回答了她。于是咖苔琳夫人说：
“你父亲的财产得由柯林斯先生继承吧，我想？”──说到这里，她又掉过头来对夏绿 蒂说：“为你着想，我倒觉得高兴；否则我实在看不出有什么理由不让自己的女儿们来继承 财产，却要给别人。刘威斯・德・包尔家里就觉得没有这样做的必要。──你会弹琴唱歌 吗，班纳特小姐？”
“略知一二。”
“噢，几时我们倒想要听一听。我们的琴非常好，说不定比──你哪一天来试一试看 吧。你的姐妹们会弹琴唱歌吗？”
“有一个会。”
“为什么不大家都学呢？你们应该个个都学。魏伯家的小姐们就个个都会，她们父亲的 收入还比不上你们父亲呢。你们会画吗？”
“不，一点儿不会。”
“怎么说，一个也不会吗？”
“没有一个会。”
“这倒很稀奇。我猜想你们是没有机会学吧。你们的母亲应该每年春天带你们上城里来 投投名师才对。”
“我妈是不会反对的，可是我父亲厌恶伦敦。”
“你们的女家庭教师走了吗？”
“我们从来就没有请过女家庭教师。”
“没有女家庭教师！那怎么行？家里教养着五个姑娘，却不请个女家庭教师！我从来没 听到过这样的事！你妈简直是做奴隶似的教育你们啦。”
伊丽莎白禁不住笑起来了，一面告诉她说，事实并不是那样。
“那么谁教导你们呢？谁服待你们呢？没有一个女家庭老师，你们不就是没人照管了 吗？”
“同别的一些人家比较起来，我们家里待我们算是比较懈怠；可是姐妹们中间，凡是好 学的，决不会没有办法。家里经常鼓励我们好好读书，必要的教师我们都有。谁要是存心偷 懒，当然也可以。”
“那是毫无疑问的；不过，女家庭教师的任务也就是为了防止这种事情；要是我认识你 们的母亲，我一定要竭力劝她请一位。我总以为缺少了按部就班的指导，教育就不会有任何 成绩，而按部就班的指导就只有女家庭教师办得到。说起来也怪有意思，多少人家都是由我 介绍女家庭教师的。我一贯喜欢让一个年轻人得到很好的安插。姜金生太太的四个侄女儿都 由我给她们介绍了称心如意的位置；就在前几天，我又推荐了一个姑娘，她不过是人家偶然 在我面前提起的，那家人家对她非常满意。──柯林斯太太，我有没有告诉过你，麦特卡尔 夫人昨天来谢我？她觉得蒲白小姐真是件珍宝呢。她跟我说：‘咖苔琳夫人，你给了我一件 珍宝。’──你的妹妹们有没有哪一个已经出来交际了，班纳特小姐？”
“有，太太，全都出来交际了。”
“全都出来交际了！什么，五个姐妹同时出来交际？真奇怪！你不过是第二个！姐姐还 没有嫁人，妹妹就出来交际了！你的妹妹们一定还很小吧？”
“是的；最小的一个才十六岁。或许她还太小，不适宜多交朋友。不过，太太，要是因 为姐姐们无法早嫁，或是不想早嫁，做妹妹的就不能有社交和娱乐，那实在太苦了她们。最 小的和最大的同样有消受青春的权利。怎么能为了这样的原由，就叫她们死守在家里！我以 为那样做就不可能促进姐妹之间的情感，也不可能养成温柔的性格。”
“真想不到，”夫人说，“你这么小的一个人，倒这样有主见。请问你几岁啦？”
“我已经有了三个成人的妹妹，”伊丽莎白笑着说。“你老人家总不会再要我招出年纪 来了吧。”
咖苔琳夫人没有得到直截了当的回答，显得很惊奇；伊丽莎白觉得敢于和这种没有礼貌 的富贵太太开玩笑，恐怕要推她自己为第一个人。
“你不会超过二十岁，所以你也不必瞒年纪。”
“我不到二十一岁。”
等到喝过茶，男客们都到她们这边来了，便摆起牌桌来。咖苔琳夫人、威廉爵士和柯林 斯夫妇坐下来打“夸锥”；德・包尔小姐要玩“卡西诺”，因此两位姑娘就很荣幸地帮着姜 金生太太给她凑足了人数。她们这一桌真是枯燥无味，除了姜金生太太问问德・包尔小姐是 否觉得太冷或太热，是否感到灯光太强或太弱以外，就没有一句话不是说到打牌方面的。另 外一桌可就有声有色得多了。咖苔琳夫人差不多一直都在讲话，不是指出另外三个人的错 处，就是讲些自己的趣闻轶事。她老人家说一句，柯林斯先生就附和一句，他赢一次要谢她 一次，如果赢得太多，还得向她道歉。威廉爵士不大说话，只顾把一桩桩轶事和一个个高贵 的名字装进脑子里去。
等到咖苔琳夫人母女俩玩得不想再玩的时候，两桌牌桌就散场了，打发马车送柯林斯太 太回去，柯林斯太太很感激地接受了，于是马上叫人去套车。大家又围着火炉，听咖苔琳夫 人断定明天的天气怎么样。等到马车来了，叫他们上车，他们方始停止受训。柯林斯先生说 了多少感激的话，威廉爵士鞠了多少躬，大家方才告别。马车一走出门口，柯林斯就要求伊 丽莎白发表她对于罗新斯的感想，她看在夏绿蒂面上，便勉强敷衍了他几句。她虽然勉为其 难地说出了一大篇好话，却完全不能叫柯林斯先生满意，柯林斯没有办法，只得立刻亲自开 口，把老夫人大大重新赞扬了一番。

<- ->