
Chapter VII of Volume II
 SIR WILLIAM staid only a week at Hunsford; but his visit was long enough to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled, and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were not often met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted his mornings to driving him out in his gig and shewing him the country; but when he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments, and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of her cousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfast and dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden, or in reading and writing, and looking out of window in his own book room, which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards. Elizabeth at first had rather wondered that Charlotte should not prefer the dining parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had a pleasanter aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellent reason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have been much less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; and she gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.
From the drawing room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, and were indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages went along, and how often especially Miss De Bourgh drove by in her phaeton, which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happened almost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, and had a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely ever prevailed on to get out.
Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, and not many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise; and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livings to be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so many hours. Now and then, they were honoured with a call from her ladyship, and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room during these visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work, and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangement of the furniture, or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if she accepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of finding out that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family.
Elizabeth soon perceived that though this great lady was not in the commission of the peace for the county, she was a most active magistrate in her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to her by Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed to be quarrelsome, discontented or too poor, she sallied forth into the village to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scold them into harmony and plenty.
The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week; and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only one card table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpart of the first. Their other engagements were few; as the style of living of the neighbourhood in general was beyond the Collinses' reach. This, however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her time comfortably enough; there were half hours of pleasant conversation with Charlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year, that she had often great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where she frequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, was along the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there was a nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, and where she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.
In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away. Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring an addition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must be important. Elizabeth had heard, soon after her arrival, that Mr. Darcy was expected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were not many of her acquaintance whom she did not prefer, his coming would furnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, and she might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on him were, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidently destined by Lady Catherine; who talked of his coming with the greatest satisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, and seemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen by Miss Lucas and herself.
His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage, for Mr. Collins was walking the whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane, in order to have the earliest assurance of it; and after making his bow as the carriage turned into the park, hurried home with the great intelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay his respects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, for Mr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son of his uncle, Lord ----; and to the great surprise of all the party, when Mr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seen them, from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately running into the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding,
``I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy would never have come so soon to wait upon me.''
Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment, before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortly afterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam, who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person and address most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had been used to look in Hertfordshire, paid his compliments, with his usual reserve, to Mrs. Collins; and whatever might be his feelings towards her friend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merely curtseyed to him, without saying a word.
Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with the readiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; but his cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house and garden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to any body. At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to enquire of Elizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usual way, and after a moment's pause, added,
``My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you never happened to see her there?''
She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to see whether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed between the Bingleys and Jane; and she thought he looked a little confused as he answered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. The subject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards went away.威廉爵士在汉斯福只待了一个星期，可是经过了这一次短短的拜访，他大可以为了：女 儿嫁得极其称心如意，而且有了这样不可多得的丈夫和难能可贵的邻居。威谦爵士在这儿作 客的时候，柯林斯先生总是每天上午同他乘着双轮马车，带他到郊野去漫游；他走了以后， 家里又恢复了日常生活。伊丽莎白真要谢天谢地。因为这一次作客，跟她表兄柯林斯朝夕相 见的次数并不多。原来他从吃早饭到吃午饭那一段时间里，不是在收拾花园，就是在自己那 间面临着大路的书房里看书写字，凭窗远眺，而女客的起坐间又在后面那一间。伊丽莎白开 头很奇怪：这里的餐厅比较大，地位光线也比较好，为什么夏绿蒂不愿意把餐厅兼作起居 室？可是她立刻看出了她朋友所以要这样做，的确非常有理由，因为：假如女客也在一间同 样舒适的起坐间里，那么柯林斯先生待在自己房间里的时间就要比较少了；她很赞赏夏绿蒂 这样的按排。
她们从会客室里根本看不见外面大路的情形，幸亏每逢有什么车辆驶过，柯林斯先生总 是要告诉她们；特别是德・包尔小姐常常乘着小马车驶过，差不多天天驶过，他没有哪一次 不告诉她们的。小姐常在牧师的门前停下车来，跟夏绿蒂闲谈几分钟，可是主人从来不请她 下车。
柯林斯先生差不多每天要到罗新斯去一趟，他的太太也是隔不了几天就要去一次。伊丽 莎白总以为他们还有些别的应得的俸禄要去处理一下，否则她就不懂得为什么要牺牲那么多 的时间。有时候夫人也会光临他们的住宅，来了以后就把屋子里无论什么事都看在眼里。她 查问他们的日常生活，察看他们的家务，劝他们换个方式处置；又吹毛求疵地说，他们的家 具摆得不对，或者是他们的佣人在偷懒；要是她肯在这里吃点东西，那好象只是为了要看看 柯林斯太太是否持家节俭，不滥吃滥用。
伊丽莎白立刻就发觉，这位贵妇人虽然没有担任郡里的司法职使，可是事实上她等于是 她自己这个教区里最积极的法官，一点点芝麻大的事都由柯林斯先生报告给她；只要哪一个 穷苦人在吵架，闹意气，或是穷得活不下去，她问题亲自到村里去调解处理，镇压制服，又 骂得他们一个个相安无事，不再叫苦叹穷。
罗新斯大约每星期要请她们吃一两次饭；尽管缺少了威廉爵士，而且只有一桌牌，不过 每有一次这样的宴会，都依照第一次如法炮制。他们简直没有别的宴会，因为附近一般人家 的那种生活派头，柯林斯还高攀不上。不过伊丽莎白并不觉得遗憾，因为她在这里大体上是 过得够舒服了：经常和夏绿蒂作半个钟点的交谈，加上这个季节里又是天气睛朗，可以常常 到户外去舒畅一下。别人去拜访咖苔琳夫人的时候，她总是爱到花园旁边那座小林子里去散 散步，那儿有一条很美的绿荫小径，她觉得那地方只有她一人懂得欣赏，而且到了那儿，也 就可以免得惹起咖苔琳夫人的好奇心。
她开头两个星期的作客生涯，就这样安静地过去了。复活节快到了，节前一星期，罗新 斯府上要添一个客人。在这么一个小圈子里，这当然是件大事。伊丽莎白一到那儿，便听说 达西先生最近几个星期里就要到来，虽然她觉得在她所认识的人里面，差不多没有一个象达 西这样讨厌，不过他来了却能给罗新斯的宴会上添一个面貌比较新鲜的人，同时可以从他对 他表妹的态度看出彬格莱小姐在他身上的打算要完全落空，那更有趣极了。咖苔琳夫人显然 已经把他安排给他的表妹，一谈到他要来，就得意非凡，对他赞美备至，可是一听说卢卡斯 小姐和伊丽莎白早就跟他认识，又时常见面，就几乎好象生起气来。
不久，柯林斯家里就知道达西来了；因为牧师先生那天整个上午都在汉斯福旁的门房附 近走动，以便尽早获得确凿的消息；等到马车驶进花园，他就一鞠躬，连忙跑进屋去报告这 重大的新闻。第二天上午，他赶快到罗新斯去拜会。他一共要拜会咖苔琳夫人的两位姨侄， 因为达西先生还带来了一位费茨威廉上校，是达西舅父（某某爵士）的小儿子。柯林斯先生 回家来的时候，把那两位贵宾也带来了，大家很是吃惊。夏绿蒂从她丈夫的房间里看到他们 一行三人从大路那边走过来，便立刻奔进另外一个房间，告诉小姐们说，她们马上就会有贵 客降临，接着又说：
“伊丽莎，这次贵客光临，我得感谢你呀。否则达西先生才不会一下子就来拜访我 呢。”
伊丽莎白听到这番恭维话，还没有来得及申辩，门铃就响了，宣布贵宾光临。不大一会 儿工夫，宾主三人一同走进屋来。带头的是费茨威廉上校，大约三十岁左右，人长得不漂 亮，可是从仪表和谈吐看来，倒是个地道的绅士。达西先生完全是当初在哈福德郡的那副老 样子，用他往常一贯的矜持态度，向柯林斯太太问好。尽管他对她的朋友伊丽莎白可能另有 一种感情，然而见到她的时候，神色却极其镇定。伊丽莎白只对他行了个屈膝礼，一句话也 没说。
费茨威廉上校立刻就跟大家攀谈起来，口齿伶俐，象个有教养的人，并且谈得颇有风 趣；可是他那位表兄，却只跟柯林斯太太把房子和花园稍许评赏了几句，就坐那儿没有跟任 何人说话。过了一会儿，他重新想到了礼貌问题，便向伊丽莎白问候她和她全家人的安好。 伊丽莎白照例敷衍了他几句，停了片刻，她又说：
“我姐姐最近三个月来一直在城里。你从来没有碰到过她吗？”
其实她明明知道他从来没有碰到过吉英，只不过为了想要探探他的口气，看看他是否知 道彬格莱一家人和吉英之间的关系。他回答说，不幸从来未曾碰到过班纳特小姐，她觉得他 回答这话时神色有点慌张。这件事没有再谈下去，两位贵宾立刻就告辞了。


<- ->