
Chapter VIII of Volume II (Chap. 31)
 COLONEL Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the parsonage, and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasure of their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before they received any invitation thither, for while there were visitors in the house they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day, almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured by such an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church to come there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very little of either Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at the parsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had only seen at church.
The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joined the party in Lady Catherine's drawing room. Her ladyship received them civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means so acceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact, almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy, much more than to any other person in the room.
Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; any thing was a welcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend had moreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, and talked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and staying at home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half so well entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so much spirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself as well as of Mr. Darcy. His eyes had been soon and repeatedly turned towards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship after a while shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did not scruple to call out,
``What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talking of? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.''
``We are speaking of music, Madam,'' said he, when no longer able to avoid a reply.
``Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. I must have my share in the conversation, if you are speaking of music. There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoyment of music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt, I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her health had allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performed delightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?''
Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency.
``I am very glad to hear such a good account of her,'' said Lady Catherine; ``and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excel, if she does not practise a great deal.''
``I assure you, Madam,'' he replied, ``that she does not need such advice. She practises very constantly.''
``So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next write to her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I often tell young ladies, that no excellence in music is to be acquired, without constant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that she will never play really well, unless she practises more; and though Mrs. Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often told her, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the piano forte in Mrs. Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that part of the house.''
Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill breeding, and made no answer.
When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of having promised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. He drew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and then talked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked away from her, and moving with his usual deliberation towards the piano forte, stationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer's countenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the first convenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said,
``You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hear me? But I will not be alarmed though your sister does play so well. There is a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at the will of others. My courage always rises with every attempt to intimidate me.''
``I shall not say that you are mistaken,'' he replied, ``because you could not really believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I have had the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know, that you find great enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact are not your own.''
Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said to Colonel Fitzwilliam, ``Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion of me, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unlucky in meeting with a person so well able to expose my real character, in a part of the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree of credit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention all that you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire -- and, give me leave to say, very impolitic too -- for it is provoking me to retaliate, and such things may come out, as will shock your relations to hear.''
``I am not afraid of you,'' said he, smilingly.
``Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of,'' cried Colonel Fitzwilliam. ``I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.''
``You shall hear then -- but prepare yourself for something very dreadful. The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know, was at a ball -- and at this ball, what do you think he did? He danced only four dances! I am sorry to pain you -- but so it was. He danced only four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certain knowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of a partner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.''
``I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assembly beyond my own party.''
``True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball room. Well, Colonel Fitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.''
``Perhaps,'' said Darcy, ``I should have judged better, had I sought an introduction, but I am ill qualified to recommend myself to strangers.''
``Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?'' said Elizabeth, still addressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. ``Shall we ask him why a man of sense and education, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommend himself to strangers?''
``I can answer your question,'' said Fitzwilliam, ``without applying to him. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.''
``I certainly have not the talent which some people possess,'' said Darcy, ``of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannot catch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in their concerns, as I often see done.''
``My fingers,'' said Elizabeth, ``do not move over this instrument in the masterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the same force or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then I have always supposed it to be my own fault -- because I would not take the trouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe my fingers as capable as any other woman's of superior execution.''
Darcy smiled, and said, ``You are perfectly right. You have employed your time much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you, can think any thing wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers.''
Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to know what they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again. Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, said to Darcy,
``Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss, if she practised more, and could have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notion of fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would have been a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn.''
Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to his cousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could she discern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Miss De Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might have been just as likely to marry her, had she been his relation.
Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixing with them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth received them with all the forbearance of civility; and at the request of the gentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage was ready to take them all home.费茨廉的风度大受牧师家里人的称道，女眷们都觉得他会使罗新斯宴会平添不少情趣。 不过，他们已经有好几天没有受到罗新斯那边的邀请，因为主人家有了客人，用不着他们 了；一直到复活节那一天，也就是差不多在这两位贵宾到达一星期以后，他们才蒙受到被邀 请的荣幸，那也不过是大家离开教堂时，主人家当面约定他们下午去玩玩而已。上一个星期 他们简直就没有见到咖苔琳夫人母女。在这段时间里，费茨威廉到牧师家来拜望过好多次， 但是达西先生却没有来过，他们仅仅是在教堂里才见到他。
他们当然都接受了邀请，准时到达了咖苔琳夫人的会客室。夫人客客气气地接待了他 们，不过事实很明显，他们并不象请不到别的客人那样受欢迎；而且夫人的心几乎都在两位 姨侄身上，只顾跟他们说话，特别是跟达西说话比跟房间里任何人都说得多。
倒是费茨廉上校见到他们好象很高兴；因为罗新斯的生活实在单调无味，他很想要有点 调剂，而且柯林斯太太的这位漂亮朋友更使他十分喜欢。他就坐到她身边去，那么有声有色 地谈到肯特郡，谈到哈福德郡，谈到旅行和家居，谈到新书和音乐，直谈得伊丽莎白感觉到 在这个房间里从来没有受到过这样的款待；他们俩谈得那么兴致淋漓，连咖苔琳夫人和达西 先生也注意起来了。达西的一对眼睛立刻好奇地一遍遍在他们俩身上打溜转；过了一会儿工 夫，夫人也有了同感，而且显得更露骨，她毫不犹豫地叫道：
“你们说的什么？你们在谈些什么？你跟班纳特小姐在谈些什么话？说给我听听看。”
“我们谈谈音乐，姨母，”费茨廉上校迫不得已地回答了一下。
“谈音乐！那么请你们说得响一些吧。我最喜爱音乐。要是你们谈音乐，就得有我的份 儿。我想，目前在英国，没有几个人能象我一样真正欣赏音乐，也没有人比我趣味更高。我 要是学了音乐，一定会成为一个名家。安妮要是身体好，也一定会成为一个名家的。我相信 也演奏起来，一定动人。乔治安娜，现在学得怎么样啦，达西？”
达西先生极其恳切地把自己妹妹的成就赞扬了一番。
“听到她弹得这样好，我真高兴，”咖苔琳夫人说：“请你替我告诉她，要是她不多多 练习，那她也好不到哪里去。”
“姨母，你放心吧，”达西说，“她用不着你这样的劝告。她经常在练习。”
“那就更好。练习总不怕太多，我下次有空写信给她，一定要嘱咐她无论如何不得偷 懒。我常常告诉年轻的小姐们说，要想在音乐上出人头地，就非要经常练习不可。我已经告 诉班纳特小姐好几次，除非她再多练习练习，她永远不会好到哪里去；我常常对她说，柯林 斯太太那里虽然没有琴，我却很欢迎她每天到罗新斯来，在姜金生太太房间里那架钢琴上弹 奏。你知道，在那间房间里，她不会妨碍什么人的。”
达西先生看到姨母这种无礼的态度，觉得有些丢脸，因此没有去理她。
喝过了咖啡，费茨廉上校提醒伊丽莎白说，她刚刚答应过弹琴给他，于是她马上坐到琴 边去。他拖过一把椅子来坐在她身旁。咖苔琳夫人听了半支歌，便象刚才那样又跟这一位姨 侄谈起话来，直谈得这位姨侄终于避开了她，从容不迫地走到钢琴跟前站住，以便把演奏者 的美丽的面貌看个清楚明白。伊丽莎白看出了他的用意，便趁机住手，回过头来对他娇媚地 一笑，说道：
“达西先生，你这样走过来听，莫不是想吓唬我？尽管你妹妹的确演奏得很好，我也不 怕。我性子倔强，决不肯让别人把我吓倒。人家越是想来吓倒我，我的胆子就越大。”
达西说：“我决不会说你讲错了，因为你不会真以为我存心吓你；好在我认识你很久 了，知道你就喜欢说一些并不是你自己心里想说的话。”
伊丽莎白听到人家这样形容她，便高兴地笑了起来，于是对费茨廉说道：“你表兄竟在 你面前把我说成一个多糟糕的人，教你对我的话一句也不要相信。我真晦气，我本来想在这 里骗骗人，叫人相信我多少有些长处，偏偏碰上了一个看得穿我真正性格的人。──真的， 达西先生，你把我在哈福德郡的一些倒霉的事儿都一股脑儿说了出来，你这是不厚道的── 而且，请允许我冒昧说一句，你这也是不聪明的──因为你这样做，会引起我的报复心，我 也会说出一些事来，叫你的亲戚们听了吓一跳。”
“我才不怕你呢，”他微笑地说。
费茨威廉连忙叫道：“我倒要请你说说看，他有什么不是。我很想知道他跟陌生人一起 的时候，行为怎么样。”
“那么我就讲给你听吧；我先得请你不要骇怕。你得明白，我第一次在哈福德郡看见 他，是在一个舞会上，你知道他在这个跳舞会上做些什么？他一共只跳了四次舞！我不愿意 叫你听了难受，不过事实确是这样。虽说男客很少，他却只跳了四次，而且我知道得很清 楚，当时在场的女客中间，没有舞伴而闲坐在一旁的可不止一个人呢──达西先生，你可不 能否认有这件事哟。”
“说来遗憾，当时舞场上除了我自己人以外，一个女客也不认识。”
“不错；跳舞场里是不作兴请人家介绍女朋友的。──唔，费茨威廉上校，再叫我弹什 么呢？我的手指在等着你吩咐。”
达西说：“也许我当时最好请人介绍一下，可是我又不配去向陌生人自我推荐。”
“我们要不要问问你的表兄，这究竟是什么缘故？”伊丽莎白仍然对着费茨威廉上校说 话。“我们要不要问问他，一个有见识、有阅历、而又受过教育的人，为什么不配把自己介 绍给陌生人？”
费茨威廉说：“我可以回答你的问题，用不着请教他。那是因为他自己怕麻烦。”
达西说：“我的确不象人家那样有本领，遇到向来不认识的人也能任情谈笑。我也不会 象人家那样随声附和，假意关切。”
伊丽莎白说：“我谈起钢琴来，手指不象许多妇女那么有气派，也不象她们那么有力和 灵活，也没有她们弹得那么有表情。我一直认为这是我自己的缺点，是我自己不肯用功练习 的缘故。我可不信我的手指不及那些比我弹奏得高明的女人。”
达西笑了笑说：“你说得完全对。可见你的成绩要好得多。凡是有福份听过你演奏的 人，都觉得你毫无欠缺的地方。我们两人可就不愿意在陌生人面前表演。”
说到这里，咖苔琳夫人大声地问他们谈些什么，打断了他们的话。伊丽莎白立刻重新弹 起琴来。咖苔琳夫人走近前来，听了几分钟以后，就对达西说：
“班纳特小姐如果再多练习练习，能够请一位伦敦名师指点指点，弹起来就不会有毛病 了。虽说她的趣味比不上安妮，可是她很懂得指法。安妮要是身体好，能够学习的话，一定 会成为一位令人满意的演奏者。”
伊丽莎白望着达西，要看看他听了夫人对他表妹的这番夸奖，是不是竭诚表示赞同，可 是当场和事后都看不出他对她有一丝一毫爱的迹象、从他对待德・包尔小姐的整个态度看 来，她不禁替彬格莱小姐感到安慰：要是彬格莱小姐跟达西是亲戚的话，达西一定也会跟她 结婚。
咖苔琳夫人继续对伊丽莎白的演奏发表意见，还给了她许多关于演奏和鉴赏方面的指 示。伊丽莎白只得极有忍耐地虚心领教。她听从了两位男客的要求，一直坐在钢琴旁边，弹 到夫人备好了马车送他们大家回家。


<- ->