
Chapter IX of Volume II (Chap. 32)
 ELIZABETH was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Jane, while Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village, when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of a visitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely to be Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away her half-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions, when the door opened, and to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, and Mr. Darcy only, entered the room.
He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for his intrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies to be within.
They then sat down, and when her enquiries after Rosings were made, seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutely necessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergency recollecting when she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, and feeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hasty departure, she observed,
``How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy! It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see you all after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the day before. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London.''
``Perfectly so -- I thank you.''
She found that she was to receive no other answer -- and, after a short pause, added,
``I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of ever returning to Netherfield again?''
``I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spend very little of his time there in future. He has many friends, and he is at a time of life when friends and engagements are continually increasing.''
``If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better for the neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then we might possibly get a settled family there. But perhaps Mr. Bingley did not take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood as for his own, and we must expect him to keep or quit it on the same principle.''
``I should not be surprised,'' said Darcy, ``if he were to give it up, as soon as any eligible purchase offers.''
Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of his friend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave the trouble of finding a subject to him.
He took the hint, and soon began with, ``This seems a very comfortable house. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr. Collins first came to Hunsford.''
``I believe she did -- and I am sure she could not have bestowed her kindness on a more grateful object.''
``Mr. Collins appears very fortunate in his choice of a wife.''
``Yes, indeed; his friends may well rejoice in his having met with one of the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have made him happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding -- though I am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as the wisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in a prudential light, it is certainly a very good match for her.''
``It must be very agreeable to her to be settled within so easy a distance of her own family and friends.''
``An easy distance do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.''
``And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day's journey. Yes, I call it a very easy distance.''
``I should never have considered the distance as one of the advantages of the match,'' cried Elizabeth. ``I should never have said Mrs. Collins was settled near her family.''
``It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Any thing beyond the very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far.''
As he spoke there was a sort of smile, which Elizabeth fancied she understood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane and Netherfield, and she blushed as she answered,
``I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near her family. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on many varying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expence of travelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not the case here. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but not such a one as will allow of frequent journeys -- and I am persuaded my friend would not call herself near her family under less than half the present distance.''
Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, ``You cannot have a right to such very strong local attachment. You cannot have been always at Longbourn.''
Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change of feeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, and, glancing over it, said, in a colder voice,
``Are you pleased with Kent?''
A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either side calm and concise -- and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotte and her sister, just returned from their walk. The tête-à-tête surprised them. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intruding on Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without saying much to any body, went away.
``What can be the meaning of this!'' said Charlotte, as soon as he was gone. ``My dear Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would never have called on us in this familiar way.''
But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely, even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after various conjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed from the difficulty of finding any thing to do, which was the more probable from the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors there was Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard table, but gentlemen cannot be always within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or the pleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, the two cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thither almost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimes separately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by their aunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because he had pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommended him still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction in being with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of her former favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she saw there was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners, she believed he might have the best informed mind.
But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficult to understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat there ten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak, it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice -- a sacrifice to propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared really animated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. Colonel Fitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he was generally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have told her; and as she would have liked to believe this change the effect of love, and the object of that love, her friend Eliza, she sat herself seriously to work to find it out. -- She watched him whenever they were at Rosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. He certainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of that look was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she often doubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes it seemed nothing but absence of mind.
She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of his being partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs. Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger of raising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in her opinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike would vanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.
In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marrying Colonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the pleasantest man; he certainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but, to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronage in the church, and his cousin could have none at all.第二天早晨，柯林斯太太和玛丽亚到村里有事去了，伊丽莎白独自坐在家里写信给吉 英，这时候，她突然吓了一跳，因为门铃响了起来，准是有客人来了。她并没有听到马车 声，心想，可能是咖苔琳夫人来了，于是她就疑虑不安地把那封写好一半的信放在一旁，免 得她问些卤莽的话。就在这当儿，门开了，她大吃一惊，万万想不到走进来的是达西先生， 而且只有达西一个人。
达西看见她单独一人，也显得很吃惊，连忙道歉说，他原以为太太小姐们全没有出去， 所以才冒昧闯进来。
他们俩坐了下来，她向他问了几句关于罗新斯的情形以后，双方便好象都无话可说，大 有陷于僵局的危险。因此，非得想点儿什么说说不可；正当这紧张关头，她想起了上次在哈 福德郡跟他见面的情况，顿时便起了一阵好奇心，想要听听他对那次匆匆的离别究竟有些什 么意见，于是她便说道：
“去年十一月你们离开尼日斐花园多么突然呀，达西先生！彬格莱先生看见你们大家一 下子都跟着他走，一定相当惊奇吧；我好象记得他比你们只早走一天。我想，当你离开
伦敦的时候，他和他的姐妹们一定身体都很好吧？”
“好极了，谢谢你。”
她发觉对方没有别的话再回答她了，隔了一会儿便又说道：
“我想，彬攻莱先生大概不打算再回到尼日斐花园来了吧？”
“我从来没有听到他这么说过；不过，可能他不打算在那儿久住。他有很多朋友，象他 这样年龄的人，交际应酬当然一天比一天多。”
“如果他不打算在尼日斐花园久住，那么，为了街坊四邻着想，他最好干脆退租，让我 们可以得到一个固定的邻居，不过彬格莱先生租那幢房子，说不定只是为了他自己方便，并 没有顾念到邻舍，我看他那幢房子无论是保留也好，退租也好，他的原则都是一样。”
达西先生说：“我料定他一旦买到了合适的房子，马上会退租。”
伊丽莎白没有回答。她唯恐再谈到他那位朋友身上去；既然没有别的话可说，她便决定 让他动动脑筋，另外找个话题来谈。
他领会了她的用意，隔了一忽儿便说道：“柯林斯先生这所房子倒好象很舒适呢。我相 信他初到汉斯福的时候，咖苔琳夫人一定在这上面费了好大一番心思吧。”
“我也相信她费了一番心思，而且我敢说，她的好心并没有白费，因为天下再也找不出 一个比他更懂得感恩报德的人了。”
“柯林斯先生娶到了这样一位太太真是福气。”
“是呀，的确是福气；他的朋友们应当为他高兴，难得有这样一个头脑清楚的女人肯嫁 给他，嫁了他又能使他幸福，我这个女朋友是个绝顶聪明的人，不过她跟柯林斯先生结婚， 我可不认为是上策。她倒好象极其幸福，而且，用普通人的眼光来看，她这门婚姻当然攀得 很好。”
“她离开娘家和朋友都这么近，这一定会使她很满意的。”
“你说很近吗？快五十英里呢。”
“只要道路方便，五十英里能算远吗？只消大半天就到得了我认为很近。”
伊丽莎白嚷道：“我从来没有认为道路的远近，也成了这门婚姻的有利条件之一，我决 不会说柯林斯太太住得离家很近。”
“这说明你自己太留恋哈福德郡。我看你只要走出浪搏恩一步，就会嫌远。”
他说这话的时候，不禁一笑，伊丽莎白觉得自己明白他这一笑的深意：他一定以为她想 起了吉英和尼日斐花园吧，于是她红了脸回答道：
“我并不是说，一个女人家就不许嫁得离娘家太近。远近是相对的，还得看各种不同的 情况来决定。只要你出得起盘缠，远一些又何妨。这儿的情形却不是这样。柯林斯夫妇虽然 收入还好，可也经不起经常旅行；即使把目前的距离缩短到一小半，我相信我的朋友也不会 以为离娘家近的。”
达西先生把椅子移近她一些，说道：“你可不能有这么重的乡士观念。你总不能一辈子 待在浪搏恩呀。”
伊丽莎白有些神色诧异。达西也觉得心情有些两样，便把椅子拖后一点，从桌子上拿起 一张报纸看了一眼，用一种比较冷静的声音说：
“你喜欢肯特吗？”
于是他们俩把这个村庄短短地谈论了几句，彼此都很冷静，措辞也颇简洁。一会儿工 夫，夏绿蒂跟她妹妹散步回来了，谈话就此终止。夏绿蒂姐妹俩看到他们促膝谈心，都觉得 诧异。达西先生把他方才误闯进来遇见班纳特小姐的原委说了一遍，然后稍许坐了几分钟就 走了，跟谁也没有多谈。
他走了以后，夏绿蒂说；“这是什么意思？亲爱的伊丽莎，他一定爱上你啦，否则他决 不会这样随随便便来看我们的。”
伊丽莎白把他刚才那种说不出话的情形告诉了她，夏绿蒂便觉得自己纵有这番好意，看 上去又不象是这么回事。她们东猜西猜，结果只有认为他这次是因为闲来无聊，所以才出来 探亲访友，这种说法倒还算讲得过去，因为到了这个季节，一切野外的活动都过时了，待在 家里虽然可以和咖苔琳夫人谈谈，看看书，还可以打打弹子，可是男人们总不能一直不出房 门；既然牧师住宅相隔很近，顺便散散步荡到那儿去玩玩，也很愉快，况且那家人又很有趣 昧，于是两位表兄弟在这段作客时期，差不多每天都禁不住要上那儿去走一趟。他们总是上 午去，迟早没有一定，有时候分头去，有时候同道去，间或姨母也跟他们一起去。女眷们看 得非常明白，费茨威廉来访，是因为他喜欢跟她们在一起──这当然使人家愈加喜欢他，伊 丽莎白跟他在一起就觉得很满意，他显然也爱慕伊丽莎白，这两重情况使伊丽莎白想起了她 以前的心上人乔治・韦翰；虽说把这两个人比较起来，她觉得费茨威廉的风度没有韦翰那么 温柔迷人，然而她相信他脑子里的花样更多。
可是达西先生为什么常到牧师家昊来，这仍然叫人不容易明白。他不可能是为了要热 闹，因为他老是在那儿坐上十分钟一句话也不说，说起话来也好象是迫不得已的样子，而不 是真有什么话要说──好象是在礼貌上委曲求全，而不是出于内心的高兴。他很少有真正兴 高采烈的时候。柯林斯太太简直弄他不懂。费茨威廉有时候笑他呆头呆脑，可见他平常并不 是这样，柯林斯太太当然弄不清其中的底蕴。她但愿他这种变化是恋爱所造成的，而且恋爱 的对象就是她朋友伊丽莎，于是她一本正经地动起脑筋来，要把这件事弄个明白。每当她们 去罗新斯的时候，每当他来到汉斯福的时候，她总是注意着他，可是毫无效果。他的确常常 望着她的朋友，可是他那种目光究竟深意何在，还值得商榷。他痴呆呆地望着她，的确很诚 恳，可是柯林斯太太还是不敢断定他的目光里面究竟含有多少爱慕的情意，而且有时候那种 目光简直是完全心不在焉的样子。
她曾经有一两次向伊丽莎白提示过，说他可能倾心于她，可是伊丽莎白老是一笑置之； 柯林斯太太觉得不应该尽在这个问题上唠叨不休，不要撩得人家动了心，到头来却只落得一 个失望；照她的看法，只要伊丽莎白自己觉得已经把他抓在手里，那么，毫无问题，一切厌 恶他的情绪自然都会消失的。她好心好意处处为伊丽莎白打算，有时候也打算把她嫁给费茨 威廉，他真是个最有风趣的人，任何人也比不上他；他当然也爱慕她，他的社会地位又是再 适当也没有了；不过，达西先生在教会里有很大的权力，而他那位表兄弟却根本没有，相形 之下，表兄弟这些优点就无足轻重了。

<- ->