
Chapter XII of Volume III (Chap. 54)
 AS soon as they were gone, Elizabeth walked out to recover her spirits; or in other words, to dwell without interruption on those subjects that must deaden them more. Mr. Darcy's behaviour astonished and vexed her.
``Why, if he came only to be silent, grave, and indifferent,'' said she, ``did he come at all?''
She could settle it in no way that gave her pleasure.
``He could be still amiable, still pleasing, to my uncle and aunt, when he was in town; and why not to me? If he fears me, why come hither? If he no longer cares for me, why silent? Teazing, teazing, man! I will think no more about him.''
Her resolution was for a short time involuntarily kept by the approach of her sister, who joined her with a cheerful look, which shewed her better satisfied with their visitors, than Elizabeth.
``Now,'' said she, ``that this first meeting is over, I feel perfectly easy. I know my own strength, and I shall never be embarrassed again by his coming. I am glad he dines here on Tuesday. It will then be publicly seen that, on both sides, we meet only as common and indifferent acquaintance.''
``Yes, very indifferent indeed,'' said Elizabeth, laughingly. ``Oh, Jane, take care.''
``My dear Lizzy, you cannot think me so weak, as to be in danger now?''
``I think you are in very great danger of making him as much in love with you as ever.''
They did not see the gentlemen again till Tuesday; and Mrs. Bennet, in the meanwhile, was giving way to all the happy schemes, which the good humour and common politeness of Bingley, in half an hour's visit, had revived.
On Tuesday there was a large party assembled at Longbourn; and the two who were most anxiously expected, to the credit of their punctuality as sportsmen, were in very good time. When they repaired to the dining-room, Elizabeth eagerly watched to see whether Bingley would take the place, which, in all their former parties, had belonged to him, by her sister. Her prudent mother, occupied by the same ideas, forbore to invite him to sit by herself. On entering the room, he seemed to hesitate; but Jane happened to look round, and happened to smile: it was decided. He placed himself by her.
Elizabeth, with a triumphant sensation, looked towards his friend. He bore it with noble indifference, and she would have imagined that Bingley had received his sanction to be happy, had she not seen his eyes likewise turned towards Mr. Darcy, with an expression of half-laughing alarm.
His behaviour to her sister was such, during dinner time, as shewed an admiration of her, which, though more guarded than formerly, persuaded Elizabeth, that if left wholly to himself, Jane's happiness, and his own, would be speedily secured. Though she dared not depend upon the consequence, she yet received pleasure from observing his behaviour. It gave her all the animation that her spirits could boast; for she was in no cheerful humour. Mr. Darcy was almost as far from her as the table could divide them. He was on one side of her mother. She knew how little such a situation would give pleasure to either, or make either appear to advantage. She was not near enough to hear any of their discourse, but she could see how seldom they spoke to each other, and how formal and cold was their manner whenever they did. Her mother's ungraciousness, made the sense of what they owed him more painful to Elizabeth's mind; and she would, at times, have given any thing to be privileged to tell him that his kindness was neither unknown nor unfelt by the whole of the family.
She was in hopes that the evening would afford some opportunity of bringing them together; that the whole of the visit would not pass away without enabling them to enter into something more of conversation than the mere ceremonious salutation attending his entrance. Anxious and uneasy, the period which passed in the drawing-room, before the gentlemen came, was wearisome and dull to a degree that almost made her uncivil. She looked forward to their entrance as the point on which all her chance of pleasure for the evening must depend.
``If he does not come to me, then,'' said she, ``I shall give him up for ever.''
The gentlemen came; and she thought he looked as if he would have answered her hopes; but, alas! the ladies had crowded round the table, where Miss Bennet was making tea, and Elizabeth pouring out the coffee, in so close a confederacy that there was not a single vacancy near her which would admit of a chair. And on the gentlemen's approaching, one of the girls moved closer to her than ever, and said, in a whisper,
``The men shan't come and part us, I am determined. We want none of them; do we?''
Darcy had walked away to another part of the room. She followed him with her eyes, envied every one to whom he spoke, had scarcely patience enough to help anybody to coffee; and then was enraged against herself for being so silly!
``A man who has once been refused! How could I ever be foolish enough to expect a renewal of his love? Is there one among the sex, who would not protest against such a weakness as a second proposal to the same woman? There is no indignity so abhorrent to their feelings!''
She was a little revived, however, by his bringing back his coffee cup himself; and she seized the opportunity of saying,
``Is your sister at Pemberley still?''
``Yes, she will remain there till Christmas.''
``And quite alone? Have all her friends left her?''
``Mrs. Annesley is with her. The others have been gone on to Scarborough, these three weeks.''
She could think of nothing more to say; but if he wished to converse with her, he might have better success. He stood by her, however, for some minutes, in silence; and, at last, on the young lady's whispering to Elizabeth again, he walked away.
When the tea-things were removed, and the card tables placed, the ladies all rose, and Elizabeth was then hoping to be soon joined by him, when all her views were overthrown by seeing him fall a victim to her mother's rapacity for whist players, and in a few moments after seated with the rest of the party. She now lost every expectation of pleasure. They were confined for the evening at different tables, and she had nothing to hope, but that his eyes were so often turned towards her side of the room, as to make him play as unsuccessfully as herself.
Mrs. Bennet had designed to keep the two Netherfield gentlemen to supper; but their carriage was unluckily ordered before any of the others, and she had no opportunity of detaining them.
``Well girls,'' said she, as soon as they were left to themselves, ``What say you to the day? I think every thing has passed off uncommonly well, I assure you. The dinner was as well dressed as any I ever saw. The venison was roasted to a turn -- and everybody said they never saw so fat a haunch. The soup was fifty times better than what we had at the Lucases' last week; and even Mr. Darcy acknowledged, that the partridges were remarkably well done; and I suppose he has two or three French cooks at least. And, my dear Jane, I never saw you look in greater beauty. Mrs. Long said so too, for I asked her whether you did not. And what do you think she said besides? "Ah! Mrs. Bennet, we shall have her at Netherfield at last." She did indeed. I do think Mrs. Long is as good a creature as ever lived -- and her nieces are very pretty behaved girls, and not at all handsome: I like them prodigiously.''
Mrs. Bennet, in short, was in very great spirits; she had seen enough of Bingley's behaviour to Jane, to be convinced that she would get him at last; and her expectations of advantage to her family, when in a happy humour, were so far beyond reason, that she was quite disappointed at not seeing him there again the next day, to make his proposals.
``It has been a very agreeable day,'' said Miss Bennet to Elizabeth. ``The party seemed so well selected, so suitable one with the other. I hope we may often meet again.''
Elizabeth smiled.
``Lizzy, you must not do so. You must not suspect me. It mortifies me. I assure you that I have now learnt to enjoy his conversation as an agreeable and sensible young man, without having a wish beyond it. I am perfectly satisfied, from what his manners now are, that he never had any design of engaging my affection. It is only that he is blessed with greater sweetness of address, and a stronger desire of generally pleasing, than any other man.''
``You are very cruel,'' said her sister, ``you will not let me smile, and are provoking me to it every moment.''
``How hard it is in some cases to be believed!''
``And how impossible in others!''
``But why should you wish to persuade me that I feel more than I acknowledge?''
``That is a question which I hardly know how to answer. We all love to instruct, though we can teach only what is not worth knowing. Forgive me; and if you persist in indifference, do not make me your confidante.''他们一走，伊丽莎白便到屋外去留达，好让自己精神舒畅一下，换句话说，也就是不停 去想那些足以使她精神更加沉闷的念头。达西先生的行为叫她惊奇，也叫她烦恼。
她想：“要是他这次来是为了要沉默寡言，庄严冷淡，那他又何必来？”
“他在城里的时候，对我的舅父母依旧很和气，很讨人喜欢，怎么反而对我两样？如果 他已经无心于我，又何必有话不说？好一个惯会作弄人的男子！今后我再也不去想念他 了。”
姐姐走近前来，使她不得不把这个念头暂时搁在一旁。她一见姐姐神色欣然，便知道这 两位贵客虽使她自己失意，却使她姐姐较为得意。
姐姐说：“第一次见面总算过去了，我倒觉得非常自在。这次我既然能够应付，等他下 次再来，我便不会发窘。他星期二能到这儿来吃饭，我倒很高兴，因为到那时候，大家都会 看出，我和他不过是无所谓的普通朋友。”
伊丽莎白笑着说：“好一个无所谓的朋友！吉英，还是当心点儿好！”
“亲爱的丽萃，你可别以为我那么软弱，到现在还会招来什么危险。”
“我看你有极大的危险，会叫他如醉如痴地爱你。”
直到星期二，她们方才又见到那两位贵客。班纳特太太因为上次看到彬格莱先生在那短 短的半小时访问过程中，竟然兴致极高，礼貌又好，因此这几天来便一直在打着如意算盘。
且说那天浪搏恩来了许多客人；主人家最渴盼的两位嘉宾都准时而到，游猎家果然是严 守时刻，名不虚传。两人一走进饭厅，伊丽莎白连忙注意彬格莱先生，看他是不是在吉英身 旁坐下，因为从前每逢有宴会，他都是坐在那个位子上。她那精明的母亲也有同感，因此并 没有请他坐到她自己身边去。他刚走进饭厅的时候，好象颇有些犹豫，增亏吉英凑巧回过头 来，凑巧在微笑，他这才拿定主意，在她身边坐下。伊丽莎白看得很是得意，不由得朝他那 位朋友望了一眼，只见达西落落大方，若无其事。她要不是恰巧看见彬格莱先生又惊又喜地 也对达西先生望了一眼，她还以为他这次之所以能够称心如意，是事先蒙到达西先生恩准的 呢。
吃饭的时候，彬格莱先生果然对她姐姐露出了爱慕之意。虽然这种爱慕表现得没有从前 那样露骨，可是伊丽莎白却觉得，只要能够完全让他自己作主，吉英的幸福和他自己的幸福 一定马上就可以十拿九稳。虽然她不敢过存奢望，可是看到他那样的态度，实在叫她高兴。 她当时心情虽然并不十分愉快，这却使她精神上得到了极大的鼓舞。达西先生的座位和她隔 得那么远，他和她母亲坐在一起。她觉得这无论是对于达西，对于她母亲，都是兴味索然， 两不方便。座位隔得远了，她自然听不清达西跟她母亲讲些什么，可是她看得出他们俩很少 谈话，谈起来又非常拘泥，非常冷淡。看看母亲对他那样敷衍应酬，再想想他对她们家里情 深谊重，她当然分外难受。有几次她真恨不得能够告诉他说，她家里并不是没有人知道他的 好处，并不是全家都对他忘恩负义。
她但愿这个下午彼此能够亲近一些，多谈些话，不要辜负了他这一场拜访，不要让他只 是在进门时听到她照例地招呼一声，便一无所获。她感到万分焦急不安，因此在两位贵客没 有走进会客室以前，她几乎厌倦沉闷得快要发脾气了。她一心盼望他们进来，因为整个下午 的兴致完全在此一着。
她想：“假如那时候他依旧不到我跟前来，我只好永远把他放弃。”两位贵客进来了； 看他那副神情，她倒觉得他不会辜负她一片心意。可是天哪！班纳特小姐在桌子上斟茶，伊 丽莎白在洒咖啡，女客们却把这张桌子团团围住，大家挤在一起，摆一张椅子的空地方也没 有。他们进来以后，有一个姑娘又向伊丽莎白身边更挨近一些，跟她低声说道：“我决计不 让这般男人来把我们分开。不管哪个男人，我们都不让他来，好不好？”
达西只得走开。伊丽莎白眼睛盯牢着他看随便看到什么人跟他说话，她都觉得嫉妒。她 几乎没有心思给客人们洒咖啡了。过了一会儿，她又埋怨自己不该这样痴心。
“他是一个被我拒绝过的男人！我怎么蠢到这般地步，竟会指望他重新爱上我？哪一个 男人会这样没有骨气，向一个女人求第二次婚？他们决不屑做这种丢面子的事！”
这时只见他亲自把咖啡杯送回来，因此她总算稍微高兴了一些，立即抓住这个机会跟他 说话：
“你妹妹还在彭伯里吗？”
“还在，她一直要在那儿待到圣诞节。”
“只有她一个人吗？她的朋友都走了没有？”
“安涅斯雷太太跟她在一起。别的人都在三个星期以前上斯卡巴勒去了。”
她想不出别的话可说了；不过，只要他愿意跟她谈话，他自有办法。他默默无言地在她 身旁站了几分钟，后来那位年轻的小姐又眼伊丽莎白咬起耳朵来，他又只得走开。
等到茶具撤走、牌桌全摆好以后，女客们都站起身来，这时伊丽莎白更希望他立刻就到 自己身边来，但见她母亲在四处硬拉人打“惠斯脱”，他也情面难却，顷刻之间就和从宾客 一起坐上牌桌，于是她一切的希望都落了空。她满怀的兴致都变成泡影。今晚她已毫无指 望。两个人只得各坐牌桌一张，达西的眼睛频频向她这边看，结果两个人都打输了牌。
班纳特太太本来打算留尼日斐花园的这两位贵客吃晚饭，不幸的是，他们吩咐佣人套车 比谁都先，因此她没有机会留他们。
客人们一走，班纳特太太便说：“孩子们，今天过得快活吗？告诉你们，我觉得一切都 非常顺利。饭菜烹调得从来没有过的那么好。鹿肉烧得恰到好处，大家都说，从来没有见过 这么肥的腰肉。说到汤，比起我们上星期在卢卡斯家里吃的，那可不知要好多少。连达西先 生也承认鹧鸪烧得美极了，我看他自己至少用了三个法国厨子呢。再说，亲爱的吉英，我从 来没有看见你比今天更美。郎格太太也这么说，因为我在她面前问过你美不美。你猜她还说 了些什么？她说：‘呃！班纳特太太，她少不了要嫁到尼日斐花园去的。她真是这么说来 着。我觉得郎格太太这个人真是太好了；她的侄女们都是些规规矩矩的好姑娘，只可惜长得 一点也不好看。我真喜欢她们。”
总而言之，班纳特太太今天的确高兴极了。她把彬格莱对吉英的一举一动全看在眼里， 因此相信吉英一定会把他弄到手。她一时高兴，便不禁想入非非，一心只指望这门亲事会给 她家里带来多少多少好处，等到第二天不见他来求婚，她又大失所望。
班纳特小姐对伊丽莎白说：“今天一天过得真有意思，来吃饭的客人都挑选得那么好， 大家都很投机。我希望今后我们能够常常聚会。”
伊丽莎白笑了笑。
“丽萃，请你千万不要笑，千万不要疑心我。这会使我难受。告诉你吧，我只不过很欣 赏这样一位聪明和蔼的年轻人的谈吐，并没有存别的非份之想。他的整个举止作风中间，有 一点我完全感到满意，那就是他绝对没有想要博得我的欢心。只不过他的谈吐实在比别人美 妙，而且他也比别人随和。”
只听得妹妹说：“你真狠心，你不让我笑，又偏偏要时时刻刻引我发笑。”
“有些事是多么不容易叫人相信！”
“又有些事简直不可能叫人相信！”
“可是，你为什么偏要逼我，认为我没有把真心话全说出来呢？”
“这话可收我无从回答了。我们都喜欢替人家出主意，可是人家出了主意，人家又不领 情。算我对你不起。如果你再三要说你对他没有什么意思，可休想叫我相信。”


<- ->