
Chapter XVII of Volume III (Chap. 59)
 ``MY dear Lizzy, where can you have been walking to?'' was a question which Elizabeth received from Jane as soon as she entered their room, and from all the others when they sat down to table. She had only to say in reply, that they had wandered about, till she was beyond her own knowledge. She coloured as she spoke; but neither that, nor any thing else, awakened a suspicion of the truth.
The evening passed quietly, unmarked by any thing extraordinary. The acknowledged lovers talked and laughed, the unacknowledged were silent. Darcy was not of a disposition in which happiness overflows in mirth; and Elizabeth, agitated and confused, rather knew that she was happy than felt herself to be so; for, besides the immediate embarrassment, there were other evils before her. She anticipated what would be felt in the family when her situation became known; she was aware that no one liked him but Jane; and even feared that with the others it was a dislike which not all his fortune and consequence might do away.
At night she opened her heart to Jane. Though suspicion was very far from Miss Bennet's general habits, she was absolutely incredulous here.
``You are joking, Lizzy. This cannot be! -- engaged to Mr. Darcy! No, no, you shall not deceive me. I know it to be impossible.''
``This is a wretched beginning indeed! My sole dependence was on you; and I am sure nobody else will believe me, if you do not. Yet, indeed, I am in earnest. I speak nothing but the truth. He still loves me, and we are engaged.''
Jane looked at her doubtingly. ``Oh, Lizzy! it cannot be. I know how much you dislike him.''
``You know nothing of the matter. That is all to be forgot. Perhaps I did not always love him so well as I do now. But in such cases as these, a good memory is unpardonable. This is the last time I shall ever remember it myself.''
Miss Bennet still looked all amazement. Elizabeth again, and more seriously assured her of its truth.
``Good Heaven! can it be really so! Yet now I must believe you,'' cried Jane. ``My dear, dear Lizzy, I would -- I do congratulate you -- but are you certain? forgive the question -- are you quite certain that you can be happy with him?''
``There can be no doubt of that. It is settled between us already, that we are to be the happiest couple in the world. But are you pleased, Jane? Shall you like to have such a brother?''
``Very, very much. Nothing could give either Bingley or myself more delight. But we considered it, we talked of it as impossible. And do you really love him quite well enough? Oh, Lizzy! do any thing rather than marry without affection. Are you quite sure that you feel what you ought to do?''
``Oh, yes! You will only think I feel more than I ought to do, when I tell you all.''
``What do you mean?''
``Why, I must confess that I love him better than I do Bingley. I am afraid you will be angry.''
``My dearest sister, now be serious. I want to talk very seriously. Let me know every thing that I am to know, without delay. Will you tell me how long you have loved him?''
``It has been coming on so gradually, that I hardly know when it began. But I believe I must date it from my first seeing his beautiful grounds at Pemberley.''
Another intreaty that she would be serious, however, produced the desired effect; and she soon satisfied Jane by her solemn assurances of attachment. When convinced on that article, Miss Bennet had nothing farther to wish.
``Now I am quite happy,'' said she, ``for you will be as happy as myself. I always had a value for him. Were it for nothing but his love of you, I must always have esteemed him; but now, as Bingley's friend and your husband, there can be only Bingley and yourself more dear to me. But Lizzy, you have been very sly, very reserved with me. How little did you tell me of what passed at Pemberley and Lambton! I owe all that I know of it to another, not to you.''
Elizabeth told her the motives of her secrecy. She had been unwilling to mention Bingley; and the unsettled state of her own feelings had made her equally avoid the name of his friend. But now she would no longer conceal from her his share in Lydia's marriage. All was acknowledged, and half the night spent in conversation.
``Good gracious!'' cried Mrs. Bennet, as she stood at a window the next morning, ``if that disagreeable Mr. Darcy is not coming here again with our dear Bingley! What can he mean by being so tiresome as to be always coming here? I had no notion but he would go a-shooting, or something or other, and not disturb us with his company. What shall we do with him? Lizzy, you must walk out with him again, that he may not be in Bingley's way.''
Elizabeth could hardly help laughing at so convenient a proposal; yet was really vexed that her mother should be always giving him such an epithet.
As soon as they entered, Bingley looked at her so expressively, and shook hands with such warmth, as left no doubt of his good information; and he soon afterwards said aloud, ``Mrs. Bennet, have you no more lanes hereabouts in which Lizzy may lose her way again to-day?''
``I advise Mr. Darcy, and Lizzy, and Kitty,'' said Mrs. Bennet, ``to walk to Oakham Mount this morning. It is a nice long walk, and Mr. Darcy has never seen the view.''
``It may do very well for the others,'' replied Mr. Bingley; ``but I am sure it will be too much for Kitty. Won't it, Kitty?'' Kitty owned that she had rather stay at home. Darcy professed a great curiosity to see the view from the Mount, and Elizabeth silently consented. As she went up stairs to get ready, Mrs. Bennet followed her, saying,
``I am quite sorry, Lizzy, that you should be forced to have that disagreeable man all to yourself. But I hope you will not mind it: it is all for Jane's sake, you know; and there is no occasion for talking to him, except just now and then. So, do not put yourself to inconvenience.''
During their walk, it was resolved that Mr. Bennet's consent should be asked in the course of the evening. Elizabeth reserved to herself the application for her mother's. She could not determine how her mother would take it; sometimes doubting whether all his wealth and grandeur would be enough to overcome her abhorrence of the man. But whether she were violently set against the match, or violently delighted with it, it was certain that her manner would be equally ill adapted to do credit to her sense; and she could no more bear that Mr. Darcy should hear the first raptures of her joy, than the first vehemence of her disapprobation.
In the evening, soon after Mr. Bennet withdrew to the library, she saw Mr. Darcy rise also and follow him, and her agitation on seeing it was extreme. She did not fear her father's opposition, but he was going to be made unhappy; and that it should be through her means -- that she, his favourite child, should be distressing him by her choice, should be filling him with fears and regrets in disposing of her -- was a wretched reflection, and she sat in misery till Mr. Darcy appeared again, when, looking at him, she was a little relieved by his smile. In a few minutes he approached the table where she was sitting with Kitty; and, while pretending to admire her work said in a whisper, ``Go to your father, he wants you in the library.'' She was gone directly.
Her father was walking about the room, looking grave and anxious. ``Lizzy,'' said he, ``what are you doing? Are you out of your senses, to be accepting this man? Have not you always hated him?''
How earnestly did she then wish that her former opinions had been more reasonable, her expressions more moderate! It would have spared her from explanations and professions which it was exceedingly awkward to give; but they were now necessary, and she assured him, with some confusion, of her attachment to Mr. Darcy.
``Or, in other words, you are determined to have him. He is rich, to be sure, and you may have more fine clothes and fine carriages than Jane. But will they make you happy?''
``Have you any other objection,'' said Elizabeth, ``than your belief of my indifference?''
``None at all. We all know him to be a proud, unpleasant sort of man; but this would be nothing if you really liked him.''
``I do, I do like him,'' she replied, with tears in her eyes, ``I love him. Indeed he has no improper pride. He is perfectly amiable. You do not know what he really is; then pray do not pain me by speaking of him in such terms.''
``Lizzy,'' said her father, ``I have given him my consent. He is the kind of man, indeed, to whom I should never dare refuse any thing, which he condescended to ask. I now give it to you, if you are resolved on having him. But let me advise you to think better of it. I know your disposition, Lizzy. I know that you could be neither happy nor respectable, unless you truly esteemed your husband; unless you looked up to him as a superior. Your lively talents would place you in the greatest danger in an unequal marriage. You could scarcely escape discredit and misery. My child, let me not have the grief of seeing you unable to respect your partner in life. You know not what you are about.''
Elizabeth, still more affected, was earnest and solemn in her reply; and at length, by repeated assurances that Mr. Darcy was really the object of her choice, by explaining the gradual change which her estimation of him had undergone, relating her absolute certainty that his affection was not the work of a day, but had stood the test of many months suspense, and enumerating with energy all his good qualities, she did conquer her father's incredulity, and reconcile him to the match.
``Well, my dear,'' said he, when she ceased speaking, ``I have no more to say. If this be the case, he deserves you. I could not have parted with you, my Lizzy, to any one less worthy.''
To complete the favourable impression, she then told him what Mr. Darcy had voluntarily done for Lydia. He heard her with astonishment.
``This is an evening of wonders, indeed! And so, Darcy did every thing: made up the match, gave the money, paid the fellow's debts, and got him his commission! So much the better. It will save me a world of trouble and economy. Had it been your uncle's doing, I must and would have paid him; but these violent young lovers carry every thing their own way. I shall offer to pay him to-morrow; he will rant and storm about his love for you, and there will be an end of the matter.''
He then recollected her embarrassment a few days before, on his reading Mr. Collins's letter; and after laughing at her some time, allowed her at last to go -- saying, as she quitted the room, ``If any young men come for Mary or Kitty, send them in, for I am quite at leisure.''
Elizabeth's mind was now relieved from a very heavy weight; and, after half an hour's quiet reflection in her own room, she was able to join the others with tolerable composure. Every thing was too recent for gaiety, but the evening passed tranquilly away; there was no longer any thing material to be dreaded, and the comfort of ease and familiarity would come in time.
When her mother went up to her dressing-room at night, she followed her, and made the important communication. Its effect was most extraordinary; for on first hearing it, Mrs. Bennet sat quite still, and unable to utter a syllable. Nor was it under many, many minutes that she could comprehend what she heard; though not in general backward to credit what was for the advantage of her family, or that came in the shape of a lover to any of them. She began at length to recover, to fidget about in her chair, get up, sit down again, wonder, and bless herself.
``Good gracious! Lord bless me! only think! dear me! Mr. Darcy! Who would have thought it! And is it really true? Oh! my sweetest Lizzy! how rich and how great you will be! What pin-money, what jewels, what carriages you will have! Jane's is nothing to it -- nothing at all. I am so pleased -- so happy. Such a charming man! -- so handsome! so tall! -- Oh, my dear Lizzy! pray apologise for my having disliked him so much before. I hope he will overlook it. Dear, dear Lizzy. A house in town! Every thing that is charming! Three daughters married! Ten thousand a year! Oh, Lord! What will become of me. I shall go distracted.''
This was enough to prove that her approbation need not be doubted: and Elizabeth, rejoicing that such an effusion was heard only by herself, soon went away. But before she had been three minutes in her own room, her mother followed her.
``My dearest child,'' she cried, ``I can think of nothing else! Ten thousand a year, and very likely more! 'Tis as good as a Lord! And a special licence. You must and shall be married by a special licence. But my dearest love, tell me what dish Mr. Darcy is particularly fond of, that I may have it tomorrow.''
This was a sad omen of what her mother's behaviour to the gentleman himself might be; and Elizabeth found that, though in the certain possession of his warmest affection, and secure of her relations' consent, there was still something to be wished for. But the morrow passed off much better than she expected; for Mrs. Bennet luckily stood in such awe of her intended son-in-law that she ventured not to speak to him, unless it was in her power to offer him any attention, or mark her deference for his opinion.
Elizabeth had the satisfaction of seeing her father taking pains to get acquainted with him; and Mr. Bennet soon assured her that he was rising every hour in his esteem.
``I admire all my three sons-in-law highly,'' said he. ``Wickham, perhaps, is my favourite; but I think I shall like your husband quite as well as Jane's.''且说伊丽莎白一走进家门，吉英便问她：“亲爱的丽萃，你们到什么地方去了？”等到 他们俩人坐下来的时候，家里所有的人都这样问她，她只得说，他们俩人随便逛逛，后来她 自己也不知道走到什么地方去了。她说话时涨红了脸；可是不管她神色如何，都没有引起大 家怀疑到那件事上面去。
那个下午平平静静地过去了，并没有什么特别的事情。公开的那一对爱人有说有笑；没 有公开的那一对不声不响。达西生性沉静，喜悦不形于色；伊丽莎白心慌意乱，只知道自己 很幸福，却没有确切体味到究竟如何幸福，因为除了眼前这一阵别扭以外，还有种种麻烦等 在前头。她预料事情公开以后，家里人有何种感觉。她知道除了吉英以外，家里没有一个人 喜欢他，她甚至顾虑到家里人都会讨厌他，哪怕凭他的财产地位，也是无法挽救。
晚上，她把真心话说给吉英听。虽说吉英一向并不多疑，可是对这件事却简直不肯相 信。
“你在开玩笑！丽萃。不会有这种事！跟达西先生订婚！不行，不行，你不要骗我；我 知道这件事不可能。”
“一开头就这样糟糕，可真要命！我唯一希望全寄托在你身上，要是你不相信我，就没 有人会相信我了。我决不是跟你胡说。我说的都是真话。他仍然爱我，我们已经讲定了。”
吉英半信半疑地看着她。“噢，丽萃，不会有这种事的。我知道你非常厌恶他。”
“你一点也不明白这里面的曲折，这种话不必再提。也许我一向并不象现在这样爱他。 可是这一类的事，总不应该把宿怨记得太牢。我从今以后也一定要把它忘记得干干净净。”
班纳特小姐仍然显出非常诧异的样子。于是伊丽莎白更加一本正经地重新跟她说，这是 事实。
吉英不禁大声叫道：“老天爷呀！真有这件事吗？这一下我可应该相信你了，我的好丽 萃，亲丽萃，我要恭喜你，我一定得恭喜你；可是，对不起，让我问你一声：你能不能断定 ──能不能百分之百地断定，嫁了他是否幸福？”
“这当然毫无疑问。我们俩都认为我们是世界上最幸福的一对。可是你高兴吗，吉英？ 你愿意要这样一位妹夫吗？”
“非常非常愿意。彬格莱和我真是再高兴也没有了。这件事我们也考虑过，谈论过，都 认为不可能。你当真非常爱他吗？噢，丽萃，什么事都可以随便，没有爱情可千万不能结 婚。你确实感觉到你应该这样做吗？”
“的确如此！等我把详情细节都告诉了你，你只会觉得我还做得不够呢。”
“你这话是什么意思？”
“嗳，我得承认，我爱他要比爱彬格莱更深切。我怕你要生气吧。”
“好妹妹，请你严肃一些。我要听你严肃地谈一谈。凡是可以对我说的话，赶快对我说 个明白，你是否愿意告诉我，你爱他有多久了？”
“这是慢慢儿发展起来的，我也说不出从什么时候开始，不过我觉得，应该从看到彭伯 里他那美丽的花园算起。”
姐姐又叫她严肃些，这一次总算产生了效果；她立刻依了吉英的意见，郑重其事地把自 己爱他的经过讲给吉英听。班纳特小姐弄明白了这一点以后，便万事放心了。
她说：“我现在真是太幸福了，因为你也会同我一样幸福。我一向很器重他。不说别 的，光是为了他爱你，我也就要永远敬重他了；他既是彬格莱的朋友，现在又成了你的丈 夫，那么除了彬格莱和你以外，我最喜欢的当然就是他啦。可是丽萃，你太狡猾了，平常连 一点口风也不向我吐露。彭伯里的事和蓝白屯的事从来没有说给我听过！我所知道的一些情 形，都是别人说给我听的，不是你自己说的。”
伊丽莎白只得把保守秘密的原因告诉了她。原来她以前不愿意提起彬格莱，加上她又心 绪不宁，所以也不讲起达西，可是现在，她大可不必再把达西为丽迪雅婚姻奔忙的那段情 节，瞒住吉英了。她把一切事都和盘托出，姐妹俩一直谈到半夜。
第二天早上，班纳特太太站在窗口叫道：“天哪！那位讨厌的达西先生又跟着我们的彬 格莱一块儿上这儿来了！他为什么那样不知趣，老是要上这儿来？我但愿他去打鸟，或者随 便去干点什么，可别来吵我们。叫我们拿他怎么办？丽萃，你又得同他出去散散步才好，不 要让他在这里麻烦彬格莱。”
母亲想出这个办法来，正是伊丽莎白求之不得的，她禁不住要笑出来，可是听到母亲老 是说他讨厌，她亦不免有些气恼。
两位贵客一走进门，彬格莱便意味深长地望着她，热烈地跟她的握手，她一看见这情 形，便断定他准是消息十分灵通；不多一会儿工夫，他果然大声说道：“班纳特太太，这一 带还有什么别的曲径小道，可以让丽萃今天再去迷路吗？”
班纳特太太说：“我要劝达西先生、丽萃和吉蒂，今天上午都上奥克汉山去。这一段长 路走起来挺有味，达西先生还没有见过那儿的风景呢。”
彬格莱先生说：“对他们两人当然再好也没有了，我看吉蒂一定吃不消。是不是，吉 蒂？”
吉蒂说她宁可待在家里。达西表示非常想到那座山上去看看四面的风景。伊丽莎白默默 表示同意，正要上楼去准备，班纳特太太在她后面说：
“丽萃，我很对不起你，逼你去跟那个讨厌的人在一起，你可不要计较。你要知道，这 都是为了吉英；你只消随便敷衍敷衍他，不必多费心思。”
散步的时候，两人决定当天下午就去请求班纳特先生表示允许；母亲那儿由伊丽莎白自 己去说。她不知道母亲是否会赞成。母亲实在太厌恶他了，因此伊丽莎白有时候竟会认为， 即使以他财产地位，也挽回不了母亲的心，可是，母亲对这门婚姻无论是坚决反对也好，欣 喜若狂也好，她的出言吐语反正都是不得体。叫人家觉得她毫无见识。她对达西先生不是欣 喜欲狂地表示赞成，便是义愤填胸地表示反对，伊丽莎白想到这里，心里实在受不了。
当天下午，只见班纳特先生刚一走进书房，达西先生便立刻站起身来跟着他走，伊丽莎 白看到这情形，心里焦急到了极点。她并不是怕父亲反对，而是怕父亲会给弄得不愉快。她 想，她是父亲最宠爱的女儿，如果她选择了这个对象，竟会使父亲感到痛苦，使父亲为她终 身大事忧虑惋惜，未免太不象话。她担心地坐在那儿，直到达西先生回到她身边，面带笑 意，她这才松了口气。一会儿工夫，达西走到她跟吉蒂一块儿坐着的那张桌子跟前来，装做 欣赏她手里的针线，轻声地跟她说：“快到你爸爸那儿去，他在书房里等着你。”她马上就 去了。
她父亲正在房间里踱来踱去，看他那种神气，既是严肃，又是焦急。
他说：“丽萃，你在闹些什么？你疯了吗，你怎么会要这个人？你不是一向都恨他 吗？”
她这时候真是焦急非凡。假若她从前不是那样见解过火，出言不逊，那就好了，那现在 用不到那么尴尴尬尬地去解释和剖白了。可是事到如今，既是免不了要费些唇舌，她只得心 慌意乱地跟父亲说，她爱上了达西先生。
“换句话说，你已经打定主意，非嫁他不可啦。他当然有的是钱，可以使你比吉英衣服 穿得更高贵，车辆乘得更华丽。难道这就会使你幸福吗？”
伊丽莎白说：“你认为我对他并没有感情，除此以外，你还有别的反对意见吗？”
“一点没有。我们都知道他是个傲慢而不易亲近的人；不过，只要你真正喜欢他，这也 无关紧要。”
女儿含泪回答道：“我实在喜欢他，我爱他。他并不是傲慢得没有道理。他可爱极了。 你不了解他真正的为人，因此，我求你不要这样编派他，免得我痛苦。”
父亲说：“丽萃，我已经允许他了。象他那样的人，只要蒙他不弃，有所请求，我当然 只有答应。如果你现在已经决定了要嫁他，我当然决计允许你。不过我劝你还是再仔细想 想：我了解你的个性，丽萃。我知道，你除非真正能敬重你的丈夫，认为他高你一等，你便 不会觉得幸福，也不会觉得得意。以你这样了不起的才能，要是婚姻攀得不相称，那是极其 危险的，那你就很难逃得了丢脸和悲惨的下场。好孩子，别让我以后眼看着你瞧不起你的终 身伴侣，为你伤心。你得明白，这不是闹着玩的”
伊丽莎白更加感动，便非常认真、非常严肃地回答他的话；后来她又几次三番地说，达 西确实确实是她选中的对象，说她对他的敬爱已经步步提高，说她相信他的感情决不是一朝 一夕生长起来的，而是搁置了好几个月考验出来的；她又竭力赞扬他种种优美的品质，这才 打消了父亲的犹疑，完全赞成了这门婚姻。
她讲完了，他便说道：“好孩子，这么说，我没有别的意见了。当真这样，他的确配得 上你。丽萃，我可不愿意让你嫁给一个够不上这种标准的人。”
为了要使得父亲对达西先生更有好感，她又把他自告奋勇搭救丽迪雅的事告诉了父亲， 父亲听了，大为惊奇。
“今天真是无奇不有了！原来一切全仗达西的大力，他一手撮合他们的婚姻，为他们赔 钱，替那个家伙还债，给他找差使！这是再好也没有了。省了我多少麻烦，省了我多少钱。 假如这事是你舅舅做的，我就非还他不可，而且可能已经还他了；可是这些狂恋热爱的年轻 人，样样事都喜欢自作主张。明天我就提出还他的钱，他一定会大吹大擂，说他怎么样爱你 疼你，那么事情就这样完了。”
于是他记起了前几天给伊丽莎白读柯林斯先生那封信的时候，她是多么局促不安；他又 取笑了她一阵，最后才让她走了；她正要走出房门，他又说：“如果还有什么年轻人来向曼 丽和吉蒂求婚，带他们进来好了，我正闲着呢。”
伊丽莎白心里那块大石头这才算放了下来，在自己房间里待了半个钟头定了定心以后， 便神色镇定地去和大家待在一起了。所有欢乐愉快的事情都来得太突然，这个下午就这样心 旷神怡地消磨过去了；现在再也没有什么重大的事情需要担忧了，但觉心安理得，亲切愉 快。
晚上母亲进化妆室去的时候，伊丽莎白也跟着母亲一起去，把这个重要的消息告诉她。 班纳特太太的反应极好。她初听到这消息，只是静静地坐着，一句话也说不出，过了好一会 儿，她才听懂了女儿的话，才隐隐约约地明白了又有一个女儿要出嫁了，这对于家里有多少 好处。到最后她才完全弄明白了是怎么回事，于是在椅子上坐立不安，一会儿站起来，一会 儿又坐下去，一会儿诧异，一会儿又为自己祝福。
“谢谢老天爷！谢天谢地！且想想看吧！天啊！达西先生！谁想得到哟！真有这回事 吗？丽萃，我的心肝宝贝，你马上就要大富大贵了！你将要有多少针线钱，有多少珠宝，多 少马车啊！吉英比起来就差得太远了──简直是天上地下。我真高兴──真快乐。这样可爱 的丈夫！那么漂亮，那么魁伟！噢，我的好丽萃！我以前那么讨厌他，请你代我去向他求饶 吧！我希望他不会计较。丽萃，我的心肝，我的宝贝。他在城里有所大住宅！漂亮的东西一 应俱全！三个女儿出嫁啦！每年有一万镑收入！噢，天啊！我真乐不可支了。我要发狂 了！”
这番话足以证明她完全赞成这门婚姻；伊丽莎白心喜的是，幸亏母亲这些得意忘形的话 只有她一个人听见。不久她便走出房来，可是她走到自己房间里还没有三分钟，母亲又赶来 了。
母亲大声叫道：“我的心肝，我脑子里再也想不到旁的东西了！一年有一万镑的收入， 可能还要多！简直阔得象个皇亲国戚！而且还有特许结婚证──你当然要用特许结婚证结婚 的。可是，我的宝贝，告诉我，达西先生爱吃什么菜，让我明天准备起来。”
这句话不是好兆头，看来她母亲明天又要在那位先生面前出丑；伊丽莎白心想，现在虽 然已经十拿九稳地获得了他的热爱，而且也得到了家里人的同意，恐怕还是难免节外生枝。 好在事出意料，第二天的情形非常好，这完全是多亏班纳特太太对她这位未来的女婿极其敬 畏，简直不敢跟他说话，只是尽量向他献些殷勤，或者是恭维一下他的高谈阔论。
伊丽莎白看到父亲也尽心竭力地跟他亲近，觉得很满意；班纳特先生不久又对她说，他 愈来愈器重达西先生了。
他说:“三个女婿都使我非常得意，或许韦翰是我最宠爱的一个；可是我想，你的丈夫 也会象吉英丈夫一样讨我喜欢。”

<- ->