
Chapter II of Volume III (Chap. 44)
 ELIZABETH had settled it that Mr. Darcy would bring his sister to visit her the very day after her reaching Pemberley; and was consequently resolved not to be out of sight of the inn the whole of that morning. But her conclusion was false; for on the very morning after their own arrival at Lambton, these visitors came. They had been walking about the place with some of their new friends, and were just returned to the inn to dress themselves for dining with the same family, when the sound of a carriage drew them to a window, and they saw a gentleman and lady in a curricle, driving up the street. Elizabeth, immediately recognising the livery, guessed what it meant, and imparted no small degree of surprise to her relations by acquainting them with the honour which she expected. Her uncle and aunt were all amazement; and the embarrassment of her manner as she spoke, joined to the circumstance itself, and many of the circumstances of the preceding day, opened to them a new idea on the business. Nothing had ever suggested it before, but they now felt that there was no other way of accounting for such attentions from such a quarter than by supposing a partiality for their niece. While these newly-born notions were passing in their heads, the perturbation of Elizabeth's feelings was every moment increasing. She was quite amazed at her own discomposure; but amongst other causes of disquiet, she dreaded lest the partiality of the brother should have said too much in her favour; and more than commonly anxious to please, she naturally suspected that every power of pleasing would fail her.
She retreated from the window, fearful of being seen; and as she walked up and down the room, endeavouring to compose herself, saw such looks of enquiring surprise in her uncle and aunt as made every thing worse.
Miss Darcy and her brother appeared, and this formidable introduction took place. With astonishment did Elizabeth see that her new acquaintance was at least as much embarrassed as herself. Since her being at Lambton, she had heard that Miss Darcy was exceedingly proud; but the observation of a very few minutes convinced her that she was only exceedingly shy. She found it difficult to obtain even a word from her beyond a monosyllable.
Miss Darcy was tall, and on a larger scale than Elizabeth; and, though little more than sixteen, her figure was formed, and her appearance womanly and graceful. She was less handsome than her brother, but there was sense and good humour in her face, and her manners were perfectly unassuming and gentle. Elizabeth, who had expected to find in her as acute and unembarrassed an observer as ever Mr. Darcy had been, was much relieved by discerning such different feelings.
They had not been long together before Darcy told her that Bingley was also coming to wait on her; and she had barely time to express her satisfaction, and prepare for such a visitor, when Bingley's quick step was heard on the stairs, and in a moment he entered the room. All Elizabeth's anger against him had been long done away; but, had she still felt any, it could hardly have stood its ground against the unaffected cordiality with which he expressed himself on seeing her again. He enquired in a friendly, though general way, after her family, and looked and spoke with the same good-humoured ease that he had ever done.
To Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner he was scarcely a less interesting personage than to herself. They had long wished to see him. The whole party before them, indeed, excited a lively attention. The suspicions which had just arisen, of Mr. Darcy and their niece, directed their observation towards each with an earnest, though guarded, enquiry; and they soon drew from those enquiries the full conviction that one of them at least knew what it was to love. Of the lady's sensations they remained a little in doubt; but that the gentleman was overflowing with admiration was evident enough.
Elizabeth, on her side, had much to do. She wanted to ascertain the feelings of each of her visitors, she wanted to compose her own, and to make herself agreeable to all; and in the latter object, where she feared most to fail, she was most sure of success, for those to whom she endeavoured to give pleasure were prepossessed in her favour. Bingley was ready, Georgiana was eager, and Darcy determined to be pleased.
In seeing Bingley, her thoughts naturally flew to her sister; and oh! how ardently did she long to know whether any of his were directed in a like manner. Sometimes she could fancy that he talked less than on former occasions, and once or twice pleased herself with the notion that as he looked at her, he was trying to trace a resemblance. But though this might be imaginary, she could not be deceived as to his behaviour to Miss Darcy, who had been set up as a rival of Jane. No look appeared on either side that spoke particular regard. Nothing occurred between them that could justify the hopes of his sister. On this point she was soon satisfied; and two or three little circumstances occurred ere they parted which, in her anxious interpretation, denoted a recollection of Jane not untinctured by tenderness, and a wish of saying more that might lead to the mention of her, had he dared. He observed to her, at a moment when the others were talking together, and in a tone which had something of real regret, that it ``was a very long time since he had had the pleasure of seeing her --'' and, before she could reply, he added, ``It is above eight months. We have not met since the 26th of November, when we were all dancing together at Netherfield.''
Elizabeth was pleased to find his memory so exact; and he afterwards took occasion to ask her, when unattended to by any of the rest, whether all her sisters were at Longbourn. There was not much in the question, nor in the preceding remark, but there was a look and manner which gave them meaning.
It was not often that she could turn her eyes on Mr. Darcy himself; but, whenever she did catch a glimpse, she saw an expression of general complaisance, and in all that he said she heard an accent so far removed from hauteur or disdain of his companions, as convinced her that the improvement of manners which she had yesterday witnessed, however temporary its existence might prove, had at least outlived one day. When she saw him thus seeking the acquaintance and courting the good opinion of people, with whom any intercourse a few months ago would have been a disgrace; when she saw him thus civil, not only to herself, but to the very relations whom he had openly disdained, and recollected their last lively scene in Hunsford Parsonage, the difference, the change was so great, and struck so forcibly on her mind, that she could hardly restrain her astonishment from being visible. Never, even in the company of his dear friends at Netherfield, or his dignified relations at Rosings, had she seen him so desirous to please, so free from self-consequence or unbending reserve, as now, when no importance could result from the success of his endeavours, and when even the acquaintance of those to whom his attentions were addressed would draw down the ridicule and censure of the ladies both of Netherfield and Rosings.
Their visitors staid with them above half an hour, and when they arose to depart, Mr. Darcy called on his sister to join him in expressing their wish of seeing Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner and Miss Bennet to dinner at Pemberley before they left the country. Miss Darcy, though with a diffidence which marked her little in the habit of giving invitations, readily obeyed. Mrs. Gardiner looked at her niece, desirous of knowing how she, whom the invitation most concerned, felt disposed as to its acceptance, but Elizabeth had turned away her head. Presuming, however, that this studied avoidance spoke rather a momentary embarrassment, than any dislike of the proposal, and seeing in her husband, who was fond of society, a perfect willingness to accept it, she ventured to engage for her attendance, and the day after the next was fixed on.
Bingley expressed great pleasure in the certainty of seeing Elizabeth again, having still a great deal to say to her, and many enquiries to make after all their Hertfordshire friends. Elizabeth, construing all this into a wish of hearing her speak of her sister, was pleased; and on this account, as well as some others, found herself, when their visitors left them, capable of considering the last half hour with some satisfaction, though while it was passing the enjoyment of it had been little. Eager to be alone, and fearful of enquiries or hints from her uncle and aunt, she staid with them only long enough to hear their favourable opinion of Bingley, and then hurried away to dress.
But she had no reason to fear Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner's curiosity; it was not their wish to force her communication. It was evident that she was much better acquainted with Mr. Darcy than they had before any idea of; it was evident that he was very much in love with her. They saw much to interest, but nothing to justify enquiry.
Of Mr. Darcy it was now a matter of anxiety to think well; and, as far as their acquaintance reached, there was no fault to find. They could not be untouched by his politeness, and, had they drawn his character from their own feelings and his servant's report, without any reference to any other account, the circle in Hertfordshire to which he was known would not have recognised it for Mr. Darcy. There was now an interest, however, in believing the housekeeper; and they soon became sensible that the authority of a servant who had known him since he was four years old, and whose own manners indicated respectability, was not to be hastily rejected. Neither had any thing occurred in the intelligence of their Lambton friends that could materially lessen its weight. They had nothing to accuse him of but pride; pride he probably had, and if not, it would certainly be imputed by the inhabitants of a small market-town where the family did not visit. It was acknowledged, however, that he was a liberal man, and did much good among the poor.
With respect to Wickham, the travellers soon found that he was not held there in much estimation; for though the chief of his concerns with the son of his patron were imperfectly understood, it was yet a well known fact that on his quitting Derbyshire he had left many debts behind him, which Mr. Darcy afterwards discharged.
As for Elizabeth, her thoughts were at Pemberley this evening more than the last; and the evening, though as it passed it seemed long, was not long enough to determine her feelings towards one in that mansion; and she lay awake two whole hours endeavouring to make them out. She certainly did not hate him. No; hatred had vanished long ago, and she had almost as long been ashamed of ever feeling a dislike against him that could be so called. The respect created by the conviction of his valuable qualities, though at first unwillingly admitted, had for some time ceased to be repugnant to her feelings; and it was now heightened into somewhat of a friendlier nature by the testimony so highly in his favour, and bringing forward his disposition in so amiable a light, which yesterday had produced. But above all, above respect and esteem, there was a motive within her of good will which could not be overlooked. It was gratitude. -- Gratitude, not merely for having once loved her, but for loving her still well enough to forgive all the petulance and acrimony of her manner in rejecting him, and all the unjust accusations accompanying her rejection. He who, she had been persuaded, would avoid her as his greatest enemy, seemed, on this accidental meeting, most eager to preserve the acquaintance, and without any indelicate display of regard, or any peculiarity of manner, where their two selves only were concerned, was soliciting the good opinion of her friends, and bent on making her known to his sister. Such a change in a man of so much pride excited not only astonishment but gratitude -- for to love, ardent love, it must be attributed; and as such, its impression on her was of a sort to be encouraged, as by no means unpleasing, though it could not be exactly defined. She respected, she esteemed, she was grateful to him; she felt a real interest in his welfare; and she only wanted to know how far she wished that welfare to depend upon herself, and how far it would be for the happiness of both that she should employ the power, which her fancy told her she still possessed, of bringing on the renewal of his addresses.
It had been settled in the evening, between the aunt and niece, that such a striking civility as Miss Darcy's, in coming to them on the very day of her arrival at Pemberley -- for she had reached it only to a late breakfast -- ought to be imitated, though it could not be equalled, by some exertion of politeness on their side; and, consequently, that it would be highly expedient to wait on her at Pemberley the following morning. They were, therefore, to go. -- Elizabeth was pleased, though, when she asked herself the reason, she had very little to say in reply.
Mr. Gardiner left them soon after breakfast. The fishing scheme had been renewed the day before, and a positive engagement made of his meeting some of the gentlemen at Pemberley by noon.伊丽莎白料定达西先生的妹妹一到彭伯里，达西先生隔天就会带着她来拜访她，因此决 定那天整个上午都不离开旅馆，至多在附近走走。可是她完全猜错了，原来她舅父母到达蓝 白屯的当天上午，那批客人就到了彭伯里。他们到了蓝白屯的，便跟着几个新朋友到各处去 溜达了一转，刚刚回到旅馆去换衣服，以便到一家朋友那里去吃饭，忽然听到一阵马车声， 他们便走到窗口，只见一男一女，坐着一辆双轮马车，从大街上往这边来。伊丽莎白立刻就 认出了马车夫的号衣，心里有了数，于是告诉舅父母说，她就要有贵客光临。舅父母听了都 非常惊讶。他们看见她说起话来那么窘，再把眼前的事实和昨天种种情景前前后后想一想， 便对这件事有了一种新的看法。他们以前虽然完全蒙在鼓里，没有看出达西先生爱上了他们 的外甥女儿，可是他们现在觉得一定是这么回事，否则他这百般殷勤就无法解释了。他们脑 子里不断地转着这些新的念头，伊丽莎白本人也不禁越来越心慌意乱。她奇怪自己怎么会这 样坐立不安。她前思后想，很是焦急，怕的是达西先生为了爱她缘故，会在他妹妹面前把她 捧得太过分；她愈是想要讨人喜欢，便愈是怀疑自己没有讨人喜欢的本领。
她为了怕让舅父母看见，便打从窗前退缩回来，在房间里踱来踱去，竭力装出心神镇定 的样子，只见舅父母神色诧异，这可更糟了。
达西兄妹终于走进了旅馆，大家郑重其事地介绍了一番，伊丽莎白看到达西小姐也和自 己同样显得不好意思，不禁颇感惊奇。自从她来到蓝白屯以来，总是听说达西小姐为人非常 傲慢，可是这会儿她只观察了她几分钟工夫，就断定她不过是过分羞怯畏缩。达西小姐只是 唯唯喏喏，此外你休想再逼得出她一句话来。
达西小姐身材很高，身段比伊丽莎白粗壮，她虽然才十六岁，可是已经发育完全，一举 一动都象大人，端庄大方。她抵不上她哥哥漂亮，可是她的脸蛋儿长得聪明有趣，仪表又谦 和文雅。伊丽莎白本以为她看起人来也象达西一样尖酸刻薄，不留情面，现在见她并不如 此，倒放下了心。
他们见面不久，达西先生就告诉伊丽莎白说，彬格莱也要来拜访她；她正要说一声不胜 荣幸，可是话未出口，就听见彬格莱先生上楼梯的急促的脚步声，一刹那工夫，他就进来 了。伊丽莎白本来已经对他心平气和，纵使余怒未消，只要看他这次来访，情恳意切，喜庆 重逢，这般情景便使得她有气也变成无气了。他亲亲切切地问候她全家安好，虽然只说了几 句寻常话，可是他的容貌谈吐，却完全和从前一样安详愉快。
嘉丁纳夫妇也和她有同感，认为他是个耐人寻味的人物。他们早就想见见他。眼前这些 人确实引起了他们极大的兴趣。他们因为怀疑达西先生跟他们外甥女儿的关系，便禁不住偷 偷仔细观察双方的情形，观察的结果，他们立刻确定两个人中间至少有一个已经尝到了恋爱 的滋味。小姐的心思一时还不能断定，可是先生方面显然是情意绵绵。
伊丽莎白忙于应付。她既要明白在场宾客中每个人对她观感如何，又要确定她自己对人 家的观感如何，还要搏得大家的好感。她最怕不能博得大家的好感，可是效果偏偏非常好， 因为她要讨好的那些人，未来之前都已对她怀着好感。彬格莱存心要和她交好，乔治安娜极 想和她要好，达西非要讨她的好不可。
看到了彬格莱，她一切的念头自然都转到自己姐姐身上去了，她多么想要知道他是不是 也同她一样，会想到她姐姐！她有时觉得他比从前说话说得少了。不过有一两次，当他看着 她的时候，她又觉得他竭力想在她身上看出一点和姐姐相似的地方。这也许是她自己的凭空 假想，不过有一件事她可看得很真切：人家都说达西小姐是吉英的情敌，其实彬格莱先生对 达西小姐并没有什么情意。他们两人之间看不出有什么特别钟情的地方。无论什么地方，都 不能证明彬格莱小姐的愿望一定会实现。伊丽莎白立刻就觉得自己这种想法颇近情理。宾客 们临走以前，又发生了两三件小事，伊丽莎白因为爱姐心切，便认为为两三件小事足以说明 彬格莱先生对吉英依然旧情难忘，而且他还想多攀谈一会儿，以便谈到吉英身上去，只可惜 他胆量甚小，未敢如此。他只有趁着别人在一起谈话时，才用一种万分遗憾的语气跟她说： “我和她好久不曾相见，真是福薄缘浅。”她还没有来得及回他的话，他又说道：“有八个 多月不见面了。我们是十一月二十六日分别的，那一次我们大家都在尼日斐花园跳舞。”
伊丽莎白见他对往事记得这么清楚，很是高兴；后来他又趁着别人不在意的时候，向她 问起她姐妹们现在是不是全在浪搏恩。这前前后后的一些话，本身并没有什么深意，可是说 话人的神情态度，却大可玩味。
她虽然不能常常向达西先生顾盼，可是她只消随时瞥他一眼，就看见他脸上总是那么亲 切，她听他谈吐之间既没有丝毫的高傲习气，也没有半点蔑视她亲戚的意味，于是她心里不 由得想道：昨天亲眼看到他作风大有改进，那即使是一时的改变，至少也保持到了今天。几 个月以前他认为和这些人打交道有失身份，如今他却这样乐于结交他们，而且要搏得他们的 好感；她看到他不仅对她自己礼貌周全，甚至对那些他曾经声言看不入眼的亲戚们。礼貌也 颇周全。上次他在汉斯福牧师家里向她求婚的那一幕，还历历如在目前，如今对比起来，真 是前后判若两人。这种种情形，实在使她激动得太厉害，使她几乎禁不住把心里的惊奇流露 到脸上来。她从来没见过他这样一心要讨好别人，无论在尼日斐花园和他那些好朋友们在一 起的时候，或是在罗新斯跟他那些高贵的亲戚在一起的时候，也不曾象现在这样虚怀若谷， 有说有笑，何况他这样的热情并不能增进他自己的体面，何况他现在殷勤招待的这些人，即 使跟他攀上了交情，也只会落得尼日花园和罗新斯的太太小姐们嘲笑指摘。
这些客人在他们这儿待了半个多钟头；临走的时候，达西叫他妹妹跟他一起向嘉丁纳夫 妇和班纳特小姐表示，希望他们在离开这儿以前，上彭伯里去吃顿便饭。达西小姐虽然对于 邀请客人还不大习惯，显得有些畏畏缩缩，可是她却立刻照做了。于是嘉丁纳太太望着外甥 女儿，看她是不是愿意去，因为这次请客主要是为了她，不料伊丽莎白转过头去不响。嘉丁 纳太太认为这样假痴假呆是一时的羞怯，而不是不喜欢这次邀请；她又看看自己的丈夫：他 本来就是个爱交际的人，这会儿更显得完全愿意去的样子，于是她就大胆答应了日期订在后 天。
彬格莱表示十分高兴，因为他又可以多一次看到伊丽莎白的机会，他还有许多话要和她 谈，还要向她打听哈福德郡某些朋友的情况。伊丽莎白认为这一切都只是因为，他想从她嘴 里探听她姐姐的消息，因此心里很快活。凡此种种，虽然她当时倒并不怎么特别欢欣，可是 客人们走了以后，她一想起刚才那半个钟头的情景，就不禁得意非凡。她怕舅父母追三问 四，很想走开，所以她一听完他们把彬格莱赞扬了一番以后，便赶快去换衣服。
可是她没有 理由害怕嘉丁纳夫妇的好奇心，因为他们并不想强迫她讲出心里的话。她跟达西先生的交 情，显然不是他们以前所猜想的那种泛泛之交，他显然爱上了她，舅父母发现了许多蛛丝马 迹，可又实在不便过问。
他们现在一心只想到达西先生的好处。他们和他认识到现在为止，从他身上找不出半点 儿错处。他那样的客气，使他们不得不感动。要是他们光凭着自己的感想和那个管家奶奶的 报道来称道他的不人，而不参考任何其他资料，那么，哈福德郡那些认识他的人，简直辨别 不出这是讲的达西先生。大家现在都愿意去相信那个管家奶奶的话，因为她在主人四岁的那 年就来到他，当然深知主人的为人，加上她本身的举止也令人起敬，那就决不应该贸贸然把 她的话置若罔闻，何况根据蓝白屯的朋友们跟他们讲的情形来看，也觉得这位管家奶奶的话 没有什么不可靠的地方。达西除了傲慢之外，人家指摘不出他有任何错处。说到傲慢，他也 许果真有些傲慢，纵使他并不傲慢，那么，那个小镇上的居民们见他全家终年足迹不至，自 然也要说他傲慢。不过大家都公认他是个很大方的人，济苦救贫，慷慨解囊。
再说韦翰，他 们立刻就发觉他在这个地方并不十分受人器重；虽然大家不大明了他和他恩人的独生子之间 的主要关系，可是大家都知道他离开德比郡时曾经欠下了多少债务，后来都是达西先生替他 偿还的。
伊丽莎白这个晚上一心一意只想到彭伯里，比昨天晚上还要想得厉害。这虽然是一个漫 漫的长夜，可是她还是觉得不够长，因为彭伯里大厦里那个人弄得她心里千头万绪，她在床 上整整躺了两个钟头睡不着觉，左思右想，还弄不明白对他究竟是爱是憎。她当然不会恨 他。决不会的；恨早就消了。如果说她当真一度讨厌过他，她也早就为当初这种心情感到惭 愧。她既然认为他具有许多高尚的品质，自然就尊敬起他来，尽管她开头还不大愿意承认， 事实上早就因为尊敬他而不觉得他有丝毫讨厌的地方了。她现在又听到大家都说他的好话， 昨天她又亲眼看到了种种情形，看出他原来是个性格很柔顺的人，于是尊敬之外又添了几分 亲切，但是问题的关键还不在于她对他尊敬和器重，而在于她还存着一片好心好意，这一点 可不能忽略。她对他颇有几分感激之心。她所以感激他，不仅因为他曾经爱过她，而且因为 当初她虽然那么意气用事，斩钉截铁地拒绝过他，错怪过他，如今他却决不计较，反而依旧 爱她。她本以为他会恨她入骨，决不会再理睬她，可是这一次邂逅而遇，他却好象急不待缓 地要跟她重修旧好。提到他们俩人本身方面的事情，他虽然旧情难忘，可是语气神态之间， 却没有粗鄙怪癖的表现，只是竭力想要获得她亲友们的好感，而且真心诚意地要介绍她和他 的妹妹认识。这么傲慢的一个男人会一下子变得这样谦虚，这不仅叫人惊奇，也叫人感激， 这不能不归根于爱情，浓烈的爱情。她虽然不能千真万确地把这种爱情说出一个所以然来， 可是她决不觉得讨厌，而且还深深地给打动了心，觉得应该让这种爱情滋长下去。她既然尊 敬他，器重他，感激他，便免不了极其关心到他幸福；她相信自己依旧有本领叫他再来求 婚，问题只在于她是否应该放心大胆地施展出这副本领，以便达到双方的幸福。
晚上她和舅母商谈，觉得达西小姐那么客气，回到彭伯里已经是吃早饭的时候，却还当 天就赶来看她们，她们即使不能象她那样礼貌周全，至少也应该稍有礼貌，去回拜她一次。 最后她们认为，最好是明天一大早就上彭伯里去拜候她，她们决定就这么办。伊丽莎白很是 高兴，不过她只要问问自己为什么这样高兴，却又答不上来了。
吃过早饭以后，嘉丁纳先生马上就出去了，因为上一天他又重新跟人家谈到了钓鱼的 事，约定今天中午到彭伯里去和几位绅士碰头。

<- ->