





 PART 1
  
1 INT -- CABIN -- NIGHT (1946)
A dark, empty room.
The door bursts open. A MAN and WOMAN enter, drunk and giggling, horny as hell. No sooner is the door shut than they're all over each other, ripping at clothes, pawing at flesh, mouths locked together.
He gropes for a lamp, tries to turn it on, knocks it over instead. Hell with it. He's got more urgent things to do, like getting her blouse open and his hands on her breasts. She arches, moaning, fumbling with his fly. He slams her against the wall, ripping her skirt. We hear fabric tear.
He enters her right then and there, roughly, up against the wall. She cries out, hitting her head against the wall but not caring, grinding against him, clawing his back, shivering with the sensations running through her. He carries her across the room with her legs wrapped around him. They fall onto the bed.
CAMERA PULLS BACK, exiting through the window, traveling smoothly outside...
2 EXT -- CABIN -- NIGHT (1946) 2
...to reveal the bungalow, remote in a wooded area, the lovers' cries spilling into the night...
...and we drift down a wooded path, the sounds of rutting passion growing fainter, mingling now with the night sounds of crickets and hoot owls...
...and we begin to hear FAINT MUSIC in the woods, tinny and incongruous, and still we keep PULLING BACK until...
...a car is revealed. A 1946 Plymouth. Parked in a clearing.
3 INT -- PLYMOUTH -- NIGHT (1946) 3
ANDY DUFRESNE, mid-20's, wire rim glasses, three-piece suit. Under normal circumstances a respectable, solid citizen; hardly dangerous, perhaps even meek. But these circumstances are far from normal. He is disheveled, unshaven, and very drunk. A cigarette smolders in his mouth. His eyes, flinty and hard, are riveted to the bungalow up the path.
He can hear them fucking from here.
He raises a bottle of bourbon and knocks it back. The radio
plays softly, painfully romantic, taunting him:
You stepped out of a dream... You are too wonderful... To be what you seem...
He opens the glove compartment, pulls out an object wrapped in a rag. He lays it in his lap and unwraps it carefully --
-- revealing a .38 revolver. Oily, black, evil.
He grabs a box of bullets. Spills them everywhere, all over the seats and floor. Clumsy. He picks bullets off his lap, loading them into the gun, one by one, methodical and grim. Six in the chamber. His gaze goes back to the bungalow.
He shuts off the radio. Abrupt silence, except for the distant lovers' moans. He takes another shot of bourbon courage, then opens the door and steps from the car.
4 EXT -- PLYMOUTH -- NIGHT (1946) 4
His wingtip shoes crunch on gravel. Loose bullets scatter to the ground. The bourbon bottle drops and shatters.
He starts up the path, unsteady on his feet. The closer he gets, the louder the lovemaking becomes. Louder and more frenzied. The lovers are reaching a climax, their sounds of passion degenerating into rhythmic gasps and grunts.
WOMAN (O.S.)
Oh god...oh god...oh god...
Andy lurches to a stop, listening. The woman cries out in
orgasm. The sound slams into Andy's brain like an icepick. He
shuts his eyes tightly, wishing the sound would stop.
It finally does, dying away like a siren until all that's left
is the shallow gasping and panting of post-coitus. We hear
languorous laughter, moans of satisfaction.
WOMAN (O.S.)
Oh god...that's sooo good...you're the best...the best I ever had...
Andy just stands and listens, devastated. He doesn't look like much of a killer now; he's just a sad little man on a dirt path in the woods, tears streaming down his face, a loaded gun held loosely at his side. A pathetic figure, really.
FADE TO BLACK: 1ST TITLE UP
5 INT -- COURTROOM -- DAY (1946) 5
THE JURY listens like a gallery of mannequins on display, pale-faced and stupefied.
D.A. (O.S.)
Mr. Dufresne, describe the confrontation you had with your wife the night she was murdered.
ANDY DUFRESNE
is on the witness stand, hands folded, suit and tie pressed, hair meticulously combed. He speaks in soft, measured tones:
ANDY
It was very bitter. She said she was glad I knew, that she hated all the sneaking around. She said she wanted a divorce in Reno.
D.A.
What was your response?
ANDY
I told her I would not grant one.
D.A.
(refers to his notes)
"I'll see you in Hell before I see you in Reno." Those were the words
you used, Mr. Dufresne, according to the testimony of your neighbors.
ANDY
If they say so. I really don't remember. I was upset.
FADE TO BLACK: 2ND TITLE UP
D.A.
What happened after you and your wife argued?
ANDY
She packed a bag and went to stay with Mr. Quentin.
D.A.
Glenn Quentin. The golf pro at the Falmouth Hills Country Club. The
man you had recently discovered was her lover.
(Andy nods)
Did you follow her?
ANDY
I went to a few bars first. Later, I decided to drive to Mr. Quentin's
home and confront them. They weren't there...so I parked my car
in the turnout...and waited.
D.A.
With what intention?
ANDY
I'm not sure. I was confused. Drunk. I think mostly I wanted to scare them.
D.A.
You had a gun with you?
ANDY
Yes. I did.
FADE TO BLACK: 3RD TITLE UP
D.A.
When they arrived, you went up to the house and murdered them?
ANDY
No. I was sobering up. I realized she wasn't worth it. I decided to
let her have her quickie divorce.
D.A.
Quickie divorce indeed. A .38 caliber divorce, wrapped in a
handtowel to muffle the shots, isn't that what you mean? And then
you shot her lover!
ANDY
I did not. I got back in the car and drove home to sleep it off.
Along the way, I stopped and threw my gun into the Royal River. I feel I've been very clear on this point.
D.A.
Yes, you have. Where I get hazy, though, is the part where the
cleaning woman shows up the next morning and finds your wife and her lover in bed, riddled with .38 caliber bullets. Does that strike
you as a fantastic coincidence, Mr. Dufresne, or is it just me?
ANDY
(softly)
Yes. It does.
D.A.
I'm sorry, Mr. Dufresne, I don't think the jury heard that.
ANDY
Yes. It does.
D.A.
Does what?
ANDY
Strike me as a fantastic coincidence.
D.A.
On that, sir, we are in accord...
FADE TO BLACK! 4TH TITLE UP
D.A.
You claim you threw your gun into the Royal River before the murders took place. That's rather convenient.
ANDY
It's the truth.
D.A.
You recall Lt. Mincher's testimony?
He and his men dragged that river for three days and nary a gun was
found. So no comparison can be made between your gun and the bullets taken from the bloodstained corpses of the victims. That's also rather convenient, isn't it, Mr. Dufresne?
ANDY
(faint, bitter smile)
Since I am innocent of this crime, sir, I find it decidedly inconvenient
the gun was never found.
FADE TO BLACK: STH TITLE UP
6 INT -- COURTROOM -- DAY (1946) 6
The D.A. holds the jury spellbound with his closing summation:
D.A.
Ladies and gentlemen, you've heard all the evidence, you know all the
facts. We have the accused at the scene of the crime. We have foot
prints. Tire tracks. Bullets scattered on the ground which bear his fingerprints. A broken bourbon bottle, likewise with fingerprints.
Most of all, we have a beautiful young woman and her lover lying
dead in each other's arms. They had sinned. But was their crime so
great as to merit a death sentence?
He gestures to Andy sitting quietly with his ATTORNEY.
D.A.
I suspect Mr. Dufresne's answer to that would be yes. I further
suspect he carried out that sentence on the night of September
21st, this year of our Lord, 1946, by pumping four bullets into his
wife and another four into Glenn Quentin. And while you think about
that, think about this...
He picks up a revolver, spins the cylinder before their eyes like a carnival barker spinning a wheel of fortune.
D.A.
A revolver holds six bullets, not eight. I submit to you this was not
a hot-blooded crime of passion! That could at least be understood,
if not condoned. No, this was revenge of a much more brutal and
cold-blooded nature. Consider! Four bullets per victim! Not six shots
fired, but eight! That means he fired the gun empty...and then
stopped to reload so he could shoot each of them again! An extra bullet per lover...right in the head.
(a few JURORS shiver)
I'm done talking. You people are all decent, God-fearing Christian
folk. You know what to do.
FADE TO BLACK: 6TH TITLE UP
INT -- JURY ROOM -- DAY (1946) 7
CAMERA TRACKS down a long table, moving from one JUROR to the next. These decent, God-fearing Christians are chowing down on
a nice fried chicken dinner provided them by the county, smacking greasy lips and gnawing cobbettes of corn.
VOICE (O.S.)
Guilty. Guilty. Guilty. Guilty...
We find the FOREMAN at the head of the table, sorting votes.
FADE TO BLACK: 7TH TITLE UP

 
IndexNext






This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space"
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 
  
 