





 PART 7
 
67 INT -- INFIRMARY -- DAY (1949) 67
Andy lies wrapped in bandages.
RED (V.O.)
Andy spent a month in traction.
68 INT -- SOLITARY CONFINEMENT -- DAY (1949) 68
RED (V.O.)
Bogs spent a week in the hole.
Bogs sits on bare concrete. The steel door slides open.
GUARD
Time's up, Bogs.
69 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- 3RD TIER -- DUSK (1949) 69
Bogs comes up the stairs, smoking a cigarette. Not many cons around; the place is virtually deserted. A VOICE echoes dimly over the P.A. system:
VOICE (O.S.)
Return to your cellblocks for evening count.
Bogs enters his cell. Dark in here. He fumbles for the light cord, yanks it. The sudden light reveals Captain Hadley six inches from his face, waiting for him. Mert steps in behind Bogs. hemming him.
Before Bogs can even open his mouth to say "what the fuck," Hadley rams the tip of his baton brutally into his solar plexus. Bogs doubles over, gagging his wind out.
70 GROUND FLOOR 70
Ernie comes slowly around the corner, rolling a steel mop cart loaded with supplies.
71 2ND TIER 71
Red is darning a sock in his open cell. He pauses, frowning, hearing strange THUMPING sounds. What the hell is that?
72 3RD TIER 72
It's Hadley and Mert methodically and brutally pulping Bogs with their batons, and kicking the shit out of him for good measure. He feebly tries to ward them off.
73 2ND TIER 73
Puzzled, Red steps from his cell, following the sound. It dawns on him that it's coming from above. He moves to the railing and leans out, craning around to look up --
74 RED'S POV 74
-- just as Bogs flips over the railing and comes sailingdirectly toward us, eyes bugging out, SCREAMING as he falls.
75 RED (SLOW MOTION) 75
jumps back as Bogs plummets past, missing him by inches, arms
swimming and trying to grab the railing (but missing that too), SCREAMING aaaaalll the way down --
76 GROUND FLOOR 76
-- and impacting on Ernie's gassing mop cart in an enormous eruption of solvents and cleansers. The cart is squashed flat, shooting out from under Bogs and skidding across the cellblock floor like a tiddly wink, kicking up sparks for thirty yards. Ernie is left gaping in shock at Bogs and all the Bogs-related wreckage at his feet.
77 2ND TIER 77
Red is stunned. He very tentatively leans out and looks up. Above him, Hadley and Mert lean on the 3rd tier railing. Hadley tilts the cap back on his head, shakes his head.
MERT
Damn, Byron. Look'a that.
HADLEY
Poor fella must'a tripped.
A tiny drop of blood drips off the toe of Hadley's shoe and splashes across Red's upturned cheek. He wipes it off, then looks down at Bogs. Cons and guards are racing to the scene.
RED (V.O.)
Two things never happened again after that. The Sisters never laid a finger on Andy again...
7B EXT -- PRISON YARD/LOADING DOCK -- DAY (1949) 78
Bogs, wheelchair-bound and wearing a neck brace, is loaded onto an ambulance for transport. Behind the fence stand Red and his friends, watching.
RED (V.O.)
...and Bogs never walked again. They transferred him to a minimum security hospital upstate. To my knowledge, he lived out the rest of his days drinking his food through a straw.
RED
I'm thinkin' Andy could use a nice welcome back when he gets out of
the infirmary.
HEYWOOD
Sounds good to us. Figure we owe him for the beer.
RED
Man likes to play chess. Let's get him some rocks.
79 EXT -- FIELD -- DAY (1949) 79
A HUNDRED CONS at work. Hoes rise and fall in long waves.
GUARDS patrol on horseback. Heywood turns up a rocky chunk,
quickly shoves it down his pants. He maneuvers to Red and the
others, pulls out the chunk and shows it to them.
FLOYD
That ain't quartz. Nor limestone.
HEYWOOD
What are you, fuckin' geologist?
SNOOZE
He's right, it ain't.
HEYWOOD
What the hell is it then?
RED
Horse apple.
HEYWOOD
Bullshit.
RED
No, horse shit. Petrified.
Cackling, the men go back to work. Heywood stares at the rock. He crumbles it in his hands.
RED (V.O.)
Despite a few hitches, the boys came through in fine style...
80 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- BACK ROOM -- DAY (1949) 80
A huge detergent box is filled with rocks, hidden in the shadows behind a boiler furnace.
RED (V.O.)
...and by the week Andy was due back, we had enough rocks saved up to keep him busy till Rapture.
ANGLE SHIFTS to Red as he plops a bag of "laundry" on the floor. Leonard and Bob toss a few more down. Red starts pulling out contraband, giving them their commissions.
RED (V.O.)
Also got a big shipment in that week. Cigarettes, chewing gum,
shoelaces, playing cards with naked ladies on 'em, you name it...
(pulls a cardboard tube)
...and, of course, the most important item.
81 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- NIGHT (1949) 81
Andy, limping a bit, returns from the infirmary. Red watches from his cell as Andy is brought up and locked away.
82 INT -- ANDY'S CELL -- NIGHT (1949) 82
Andy finds the cardboard tube lying on his bunk.
GUARD (O.S.)
Lights out!
The lights go off. Andy opens the tube and pulls out a large rolled poster. He lets it uncurl to the floor. A small scrap of paper flutters out, landing at his feet. The poster is the famous Rita Hayworth pin-up -- one hand behind her head, eyes half closed, sulky lips parted. Andy picks up the scrap of paper. It reads: "No charge. Welcome back." Alone in the dark, Andy smiles.
83 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- MORNING (1949) 83
The BUZZER SOUNDS, the cells SLAM OPEN. Cons step from their cells. Andy catches Red's eye, nods his thanks. As the men
shuffle down to breakfast, Red glances into Andy's cell --
84 RED'S POV -- DOLLYING PAST 84
-- and sees Rita in her new place of honor on Andy's wall.
Sunlight casts a harsh barred shadow across her lovely face.
85 INT -- CELLBLOCK FIVE -- NIGHT (1949) 85
Ernie is mopping the floor. He glances back and sees Warden
Norton approach the cellblock with an entourage of a DOZEN
GUARDS. Still mopping, Ernie mutters to the nearest cell:
ERNIE
Heads up. They're tossin' cells.
Word travels fast from cell to cell. Cons scramble to tidy up and hide things. Norton enters, nods to his men. The guards pair off in all directions, making their choices at random.
GUARD
What kind'a contraband you hiding in there, boy?
Cells are opened, occupants displaced, items scattered, mattresses overturned. Whatever contraband is found gets tossed out onto the cellblock floor. Mostly harmless stuff.
A GUARD pulls a sharpened screwdriver out of a mattress, shoots a nasty look at the CON responsible.
NORTON
Solitary. A week. Make sure he takes his Bible.
CON
Too goddamn dark to read down there.
NORTON
Add another week for blasphemy.
The man is taken away. Norton's gaze goes up.
NORTON
Let's try the second tier.
86 2ND TIER 86
Norton arrives, makes a thin show of picking a cell at random. He motions at Andy on his bunk, reading his Bible. The door is unlocked. Norton enters, trailed by his men. Andy rises.
ANDY
Good evening.
Norton gives a curt nod. Hadley and Trout start tossing the cell in a thorough search. Norton keeps his eyes on Andy, looking for a wrong glance or nervous blink. He takes the Bible out of Andy's hand.
NORTON
I'm pleased to see you reading this. Any favorite passages?
ANDY
"Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the master of the house cometh."
NORTON
(smiles)
Luke. Chapter 13, verse 35. I've always liked that one.
(strolls the cell)
But I prefer: "I am the light of the world. He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life."
ANDY
John. Chapter 8, verse 12.
NORTON
I hear you're good with numbers. How nice. A man should have a skill.
HADLEY
You wanna explain this?
Andy glances over. Hadley is holding up a rock blanket, a polishing cloth roughly the size of an oven mitt.
ANDY
It's called a rock blanket. It's for shaping and polishing rocks. Little hobby of mine.
Hadley glances at the rocks lining the window sill, turns to Norton.
HADLEY
Looks pretty clean. Some contraband here, nothing to get in a twist over.
Norton nods, strolls to the poster of Rita.
NORTON
I can't say I approve of this...
(turns to Andy)
...but I suppose exceptions can always be made.
Norton exits, the guards follow. The cell door is slammed and locked. Norton pauses, turns back.
NORTON
I almost forgot.
He reaches through the bars and returns the Bible to Andy.
NORTON
I'd hate to deprive you of this. Salvation lies within.
Norton and his men walk away.
RED (V.O.)
Tossin' cells was just an excuse. Truth is, Norton wanted to size
Andy up.
87 INT -- PRISON LAUNDRY -- DAY (1949) 87
Andy is working the line. Hadley enters and confers briefly with Bob. Bob nods, crosses to Andy, taps him. Andy turns, removes an earplug. Bob shouts over the machine noise:
BOB
DUFRESNE! YOU'RE OFF THE LINE!
88 INT -- WARDEN NORTON'S OFFICE -- DAY (1949) 88
Andy is led in. Norton is at his desk doing paperwork. Andy's eyes go to a framed needle-point sampler on the wall behind him that reads: "HIS JUDGMENT COMETH AND THAT RIGHT SOON."
NORTON
My wife made that in church group.
ANDY
It's very pretty, sir.
NORTON
You like working in the laundry?
ANDY
No, sir. Not especially.
NORTON
Perhaps we can find something more befitting a man of your education.

 
LastIndexNext






This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space"
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 
  
 