
  
LAWS
by Plato
translated by Benjamin Jowett
BOOK I

PERSONS OF THE DIALOGUE: An ATHENIAN STRANGER; CLEINIAS, aCretan; MEGILLUS, a Lacedaemonian
Athenian Stranger. Tell me, Strangers, is a God or some man supposedto be the author of your laws?
Cleinias. A God, Stranger; in very truth a, God: among us Cretans heis said to have been Zeus, but in Lacedaemon, whence our friend herecomes, I believe they would say that Apollo is their lawgiver: wouldthey not, Megillus?
Megillus. Certainly.
Ath. And do you, Cleinias, believe, as Homer tells, that every ninthyear Minos went to converse with his Olympian sire, and was inspiredby him to make laws for your cities?
Cle. Yes, that is our tradition; and there was Rhadamanthus, abrother of his, with whose name you are familiar; he is reputed tohave been the justest of men, and we Cretans are of opinion that heearned this reputation from his righteous administration of justicewhen he was alive.
Ath. Yes, and a noble reputation it was, worthy of a son of Zeus. Asyou and Megillus have been trained in these institutions, I dare saythat you will not be unwilling to give an account of your governmentand laws; on our way we can pass the time pleasantly in about them,for I am told that the distance from Cnosus to the cave and templeof Zeus is considerable; and doubtless there are shady places underthe lofty trees, which will protect us from this scorching sun.Being no longer young, we may often stop to rest beneath them, and getover the whole journey without difficulty, beguiling the time byconversation.
Cle. Yes, Stranger, and if we proceed onward we shall come to grovesof cypresses, which are of rare height and beauty, and there are greenmeadows, in which we may repose and converse.
Ath. Very good.
Cle. Very good, indeed; and still better when we see them; let usmove on cheerily.
Ath. I am willing-And first, I want to know why the law has ordainedthat you shall have common meals and gymnastic exercises, and weararms.
Cle. I think, Stranger, that the aim of our institutions is easilyintelligible to any one. Look at the character of our country: Creteis not like Thessaly, a large plain; and for this reason they havehorsemen in Thessaly, and we have runners-the inequality of the groundin our country is more adapted to locomotion on foot; but then, if youhave runners you must have light arms-no one can carry a heavyweight when running, and bows and arrows are convenient because theyare light. Now all these regulations have been made with a view towar, and the legislator appears to me to have looked to this in allhis arrangements:-the common meals, if I am not mistaken, wereinstituted by him for a similar reason, because he saw that while theyare in the field the citizens are by the nature of the casecompelled to take their meals together for the sake of mutualprotection. He seems to me to have thought the world foolish in notunderstanding that all are always at war with one another; and if inwar there ought to be common meals and certain persons regularlyappointed under others to protect an army, they should be continued inpeace. For what men in general term peace would be said by him to beonly a name; in reality every city is in a natural state of war withevery other, not indeed proclaimed by heralds, but everlasting. And ifyou look closely, you will find that this was the intention of theCretan legislator; all institutions, private as well as public, werearranged by him with a view to war; in giving them he was under theimpression that no possessions or institutions are of any value to himwho is defeated in battle; for all the good things of the conqueredpass into the hands of the conquerors.
Ath. You appear to me, Stranger, to have been thoroughly trainedin the Cretan institutions, and to be well informed about them; willyou tell me a little more explicitly what is the principle ofgovernment which you would lay down? You seem to imagine that a wellgoverned state ought to be so ordered as to conquer all other statesin war: am I right in supposing this to be your meaning?
Cle. Certainly; and our Lacedaemonian friend, if I am notmistaken, will agree with me.
Meg. Why, my good friend, how could any Lacedaemonian say anythingelse?
Ath. And is what you say applicable only to states, or also tovillages?
Cle. To both alike.
Ath. The case is the same?
Cle. Yes.
Ath. And in the village will there be the same war of family againstfamily, and of individual against individual?
Cle. The same.
Ath. And should each man conceive himself to be his ownenemy:-what shall we say?
Cle. O Athenian Stranger-inhabitant of Attica I will not call you,for you seem to deserve rather to be named after the goddessherself, because you go back to first principles you have thrown alight upon the argument, and will now be better able to understandwhat I was just saying-that all men are publicly one another'senemies, and each man privately his own.
(Ath. My good sir, what do you mean?)--
Cle..... Moreover, there is a victory and defeat-the first andbest of victories, the lowest and worst of defeats-which each mangains or sustains at the hands, not of another, but of himself; thisshows that there is a war against ourselves going on within everyone of us.
Ath. Let us now reverse the order of the argument: Seeing that everyindividual is either his own superior or his own inferior, may wesay that there is the same principle in the house, the village, andthe state?
Cle. You mean that in each of them there is a principle ofsuperiority or inferiority to self?
Ath. Yes.
Cle. You are quite right in asking the question, for there certainlyis such a principle, and above all in states; and the state in whichthe better citizens win a victory over the mob and over the inferiorclasses may be truly said to be better than itself, and may bejustly praised, where such a victory is gained, or censured in theopposite case.
Ath. Whether the better is ever really conquered by the worse, is aquestion which requires more discussion, and may be therefore left forthe present. But I now quite understand your meaning when you say thatcitizens who are of the same race and live in the same cities mayunjustly conspire, and having the superiority in numbers mayovercome and enslave the few just; and when they prevail, the statemay be truly called its own inferior and therefore bad; and whenthey are defeated, its own superior and therefore good.
Cle. Your remark, Stranger, is a paradox, and yet we cannot possiblydeny it.
Ath. Here is another case for consideration;-in a family there maybe several brothers, who are the offspring of a single pair; verypossibly the majority of them may be unjust, and the just may be ina minority.
Cle. Very possibly.
Ath. And you and I ought not to raise a question of words as towhether this family and household are rightly said to be superior whenthey conquer, and inferior when they are conquered; for we are not nowconsidering what may or may not be the proper or customary way ofspeaking, but we are considering the natural principles of right andwrong in laws.
Cle. What you say, Stranger, is most true.
Meg. Quite excellent, in my opinion, as far as we have gone.
Ath. Again; might there not be a judge over these brethren, ofwhom we were speaking?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Now, which would be the better judge-one who destroyed thebad and appointed the good to govern themselves; or one who, whileallowing the good to govern, let the bad live, and made themvoluntarily submit? Or third, I suppose, in the scale of excellencemight be placed a judge, who, finding the family distracted, notonly did not destroy any one, but reconciled them to one another forever after, and gave them laws which they mutually observed, and wasable to keep them friends.
Cle. The last would be by far the best sort of judge and legislator.
Ath. And yet the aim of all the laws which he gave would be thereverse of war.
Cle. Very true.
Ath. And will he who constitutes the state and orders the life ofman have in view external war, or that kind of intestine war calledcivil, which no one, if he could prevent, would like to have occurringin his own state; and when occurring, every one would wish to bequit of as soon as possible?
Cle. He would have the latter chiefly in view.
Ath. And would he prefer that this civil war should be terminated bythe destruction of one of the parties, and by the victory of theother, or that peace and friendship should be re-established, andthat, being reconciled, they should give their attention to foreignenemies?
Cle. Every one would desire the latter in the case of his own state.
Ath. And would not that also be the desire of the legislator?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. And would not every one always make laws for the sake of thebest?
Cle. To be sure.
Ath. But war, whether external or civil, is not the best, and theneed of either is to be deprecated; but peace with one another, andgood will, are best. Nor is the victory of the state over itself to beregarded as a really good thing, but as a necessity; a man might aswell say that the body was in the best state when sick and purged bymedicine, forgetting that there is also a state of the body whichneeds no purge. And in like manner no one can be a true statesman,whether he aims at the happiness of the individual or state, who looksonly, or first of all, to external warfare; nor will he ever be asound legislator who orders peace for the sake of war, and not war forthe sake of peace.
Cle. I suppose that there is truth, Stranger, in that remark ofyours; and yet I am greatly mistaken if war is not the entire aimand object of our own institutions, and also of the Lacedaemonian.
Ath. I dare say; but there is no reason why we should rudely quarrelwith one another about your legislators, instead of gently questioningthem, seeing that both we and they are equally in earnest. Pleasefollow me and the argument closely:-And first I will put forwardTyrtaeus, an Athenian by birth, but also a Spartan citizen, who of allmen was most eager about war: Well, he says, "I sing not, I carenot, about any man, even if he were the richest of men, andpossessed every good (and then he gives a whole list of them), if hebe not at all times a brave warrior." I imagine that you, too, musthave heard his poems; our Lacedaemonian friend has probably heard morethan enough of them.
Meg. Very true.
Cle. And they have found their way from Lacedaemon to Crete.
Ath. Come now and let us all join in asking this question ofTyrtaeus: O most divine poet, we will say to him, the excellent praisewhich you have bestowed on those who excel in war sufficientlyproves that you are wise and good, and I and Megillus and Cleiniasof Cnosus do, as I believe, entirely agree with you. But we shouldlike to be quite sure that we are speaking of the same men; tell us,then, do you agree with us in thinking that there are two kinds ofwar; or what would you say? A far inferior man to Tyrtaeus wouldhave no difficulty in replying quite truly, that war is of two kindsone which is universally called civil war, and is as we were justnow saying, of all wars the worst; the other, as we should alladmit, in which we fall out with other nations who are of adifferent race, is a far milder form of warfare.
Cle. Certainly, far milder.
Ath. Well, now, when you praise and blame war in this high-flownstrain, whom are you praising or blaming, and to which kind of war areyou referring? I suppose that you must mean foreign war, if I am tojudge from expressions of yours in which you say that you abominatethose
Who refuse to look upon fields of blood, and will not draw nearand strike at their enemies.And we shall naturally go on to say to him-You, Tyrtaeus, as it seems,praise those who distinguish themselves in external and foreign war;and he must admit this.
Cle. Evidently.
Ath. They are good; but we say that there are still better men whosevirtue is displayed in the greatest of all battles. And we too havea poet whom we summon as a witness, Theognis, citizen of Megara inSicily:
Cyrnus, he who is faithful in a civil broil is worth his weight ingold and silver.And such an one is far better, as we affirm, than the other in amore difficult kind of war, much in the same degree as justice andtemperance and wisdom, when united with courage, are better thancourage only; for a man cannot be faithful and good in civil strifewithout having all virtue. But in the war of which Tyrtaeus speaks,many a mercenary soldier will take his stand and be ready to die athis post, and yet they are generally and almost without exceptioninsolent, unjust, violent men, and the most senseless of human beings.You will ask what the conclusion is, and what I am seeking to prove: Imaintain that the divine legislator of Crete, like any other who isworthy of consideration, will always and above all things in makinglaws have regard to the greatest virtue; which, according to Theognis,is loyalty in the hour of danger, and may be truly called perfectjustice. Whereas, that virtue which Tyrtaeus highly praises is wellenough, and was praised by the poet at the right time, yet in placeand dignity may be said to be only fourth rate.
Cle. Stranger, we are degrading our inspired lawgiver to a rankwhich is far beneath him.
Ath. Nay, I think that we degrade not him but ourselves, if weimagine that Lycurgus and Minos laid down laws both in Lacedaemonand Crete mainly with a view to war.
Cle. What ought we to say then?
Ath. What truth and what justice require of us, if I am notmistaken, when speaking in behalf of divine excellence;-at thelegislator when making his laws had in view not a part only, andthis the lowest part of virtue, but all virtue, and that he devisedclasses of laws answering to the kinds of virtue; not in the way inwhich modern inventors of laws make the classes, for they onlyinvestigate and offer laws whenever a want is felt, and one man hasa class of laws about allotments and heiresses, another aboutassaults; others about ten thousand other such matters. But wemaintain that the right way of examining into laws is to proceed as wehave now done, and I admired the spirit of your exposition; for youwere quite right in beginning with virtue, and saying that this wasthe aim of the giver of the law, but I thought that you went wrongwhen you added that all his legislation had a view only to a part, andthe least part of virtue, and this called forth my subsequent remarks.Will you allow me then to explain how I should have liked to haveheard you expound the matter?
Cle. By all means.
Ath. You ought to have said, Stranger-The Cretan laws are withreason famous among the Hellenes; for they fulfil the object oflaws, which is to make those who use them happy; and they confer everysort of good. Now goods are of two kinds: there are human and thereare divine goods, and the human hang upon the divine; and the statewhich attains the greater, at the same time acquires the less, or, nothaving the greater, has neither. Of the lesser goods the first ishealth, the second beauty, the third strength, including swiftnessin running and bodily agility generally, and the fourth is wealth, notthe blind god [Pluto], but one who is keen of sight, if only he haswisdom for his companion. For wisdom is chief and leader of the divinedass of goods, and next follows temperance; and from the union ofthese two with courage springs justice, and fourth in the scale ofvirtue is courage. All these naturally take precedence of the othergoods, and this is the order in which the legislator must placethem, and after them he will enjoin the rest of his ordinances onthe citizens with a view to these, the human looking to the divine,and the divine looking to their leader mind. Some of his ordinanceswill relate to contracts of marriage which they make one with another,and then to the procreation and education of children, both male andfemale; the duty of the lawgiver will be to take charge of hiscitizens, in youth and age, and at every time of life, and to givethem punishments and rewards; and in reference to all theirintercourse with one another, he ought to consider their pains andpleasures and desires, and the vehemence of all their passions; heshould keep a watch over them, and blame and praise them rightly bythe mouth of the laws themselves. Also with regard to anger andterror, and the other perturbations of the soul, which arise out ofmisfortune, and the deliverances from them which prosperity brings,and the experiences which come to men in diseases, or in war, orpoverty, or the opposite of these; in all these states he shoulddetermine and teach what is the good and evil of the condition ofeach. In the next place, the legislator has to be careful how thecitizens make their money and in what way they spend it, and to havean eye to their mutual contracts and dissolutions of contracts,whether voluntary or involuntary: he should see how they order allthis, and consider where justice as well as injustice is found or iswanting in their several dealings with one another; and honour thosewho obey the law, and impose fixed penalties on those who disobey,until the round of civil life is ended, and the time has come forthe consideration of the proper funeral rites and honours of the dead.And the lawgiver reviewing his work, will appoint guardians to presideover these things-some who walk by intelligence, others by trueopinion only, and then mind will bind together all his ordinancesand show them to be in harmony with temperance and justice, and notwith wealth or ambition. This is the spirit, Stranger, in which Iwas and am desirous that you should pursue the subject. And I wantto know the nature of all these things, and how they are arranged inthe laws of Zeus, as they are termed, and in those of the PythianApollo, which Minos and Lycurgus gave; and how the order of them isdiscovered to his eyes, who has experience in laws gained either bystudy or habit, although they are far from being self-evident to therest of mankind like ourselves.
Cle. How shall we proceed, Stranger?
Ath. I think that we must begin again as before, and firstconsider the habit of courage; and then we will go on and discussanother and then another form of virtue, if you please. In this way weshall have a model of the whole; and with these and similar discourseswe will beguile the way. And when we have gone through all thevirtues, we will show, by the grace of God, that the institutions ofwhich I was speaking look to virtue.
Meg. Very good; and suppose that you first criticize this praiser ofZeus and the laws of Crete.
Ath. I will try to criticize you and myself, as well as him, for theargument is a common concern. Tell me-were not first the syssitia, andsecondly the gymnasia, invented by your legislator with a view to war?
Meg. Yes.
Ath. And what comes third, and what fourth? For that, I think, isthe sort of enumeration which ought to be made of the remainingparts of virtue, no matter whether you call them parts or what theirname is, provided the meaning is clear.
Meg. Then I, or any other Lacedaemonian, would reply that hunting isthird in order.
Ath. Let us see if we can discover what comes fourth and fifth.
Meg. I think that I can get as far as the fouth head, which is thefrequent endurance of pain, exhibited among us Spartans in certainhand-to-hand fights; also in stealing with the prospect of getting agood beating; there is, too, the so-called Crypteia, or secretservice, in which wonderful endurance is shown-our people wanderover the whole country by day and by night, and even in winter havenot a shoe to their foot, and are without beds to lie upon, and haveto attend upon themselves. Marvellous, too, is the endurance which ourcitizens show in their naked exercises, contending against the violentsummer heat; and there are many similar practices, to speak of whichin detail would be endless.
Ath. Excellent, O Lacedaemonian Stranger. But how ought we to definecourage? Is it to be regarded only as a combat against fears andpains, or also against desires and pleasures, and againstflatteries; which exercise such a tremendous power, that they make thehearts even of respectable citizens to melt like wax?
Meg. I should say the latter.
Ath. In what preceded, as you will remember, our Cnosian friendwas speaking of a man or a city being inferior to themselves:-Were younot, Cleinias?
Cle. I was.
Ath. Now, which is in the truest sense inferior, the man who isovercome by pleasure or by pain?
Cle. I should say the man who is overcome by pleasure; for all mendeem him to be inferior in a more disgraceful sense, than the otherwho is overcome by pain.
Ath. But surely the lawgivers of Crete and Lacedaemon have notlegislated for a courage which is lame of one leg, able only to meetattacks which come from the left, but impotent against the insidiousflatteries which come from the right?
Cle. Able to meet both, I should say.
Ath. Then let me once more ask, what institutions have you in eitherof your states which give a taste of pleasures, and do not avoidthem any more than they avoid pains; but which set a person in themidst of them, and compel or induce him by the prospect of reward toget the better of them? Where is an ordinance about pleasure similarto that about pain to be found in your laws? Tell me what there isof this nature among you:-What is there which makes your citizenequally brave against pleasure and pain, conquering what they ought toconquer, and superior to the enemies who are most dangerous andnearest home?
Meg. I was able to tell you, Stranger, many laws which were directedagainst pain; but I do not know that I can point out any great orobvious examples of similar institutions which are concerned withpleasure; there are some lesser provisions, however, which I mightmention.
Cle. Neither can I show anything of that sort which is at allequally prominent in the Cretan laws.
Ath. No wonder, my dear friends; and if, as is very likely, in oursearch after the true and good, one of us may have to censure the lawsof the others, we must not be offended, but take kindly what anothersays.
Cle. You are quite right, Athenian Stranger, and we will do as yousay.
Ath. At our time of life, Cleinias, there should be no feeling ofirritation.
Cle. Certainly not.
Ath. I will not at present determine whether he who censures theCretan or Lacedaemonian polities is right or wrong. But I believe thatI can tell better than either of you what the many say about them. Forassuming that you have reasonably good laws, one of the best of themwill be the law forbidding any young men to enquire which of themare right or wrong; but with one mouth and one voice they must allagree that the laws are all good, for they came from God; and anyone who says the contrary is not to be listened to. But an old man whoremarks any defect in your laws may communicate his observation to aruler or to an equal in years when no young man is present.
Cle. Exactly so, Stranger; and like a diviner, although not there atthe time, you seem to me quite to have hit the meaning of thelegislator, and to say what is most true.
Ath. As there are no young men present, and the legislator has givenold men free licence, there will be no impropriety in our discussingthese very matters now that we are alone.
Cle. True. And therefore you may be as free as you like in yourcensure of our laws, for there is no discredit in knowing what iswrong; he who receives what is said in a generous and friendlyspirit will be all the better for it.
Ath. Very good; however, I am not going to say anything against yourlaws until to the best of my ability I have examined them, but I amgoing to raise doubts about them. For you are the only people known tous, whether Greek or barbarian, whom the legislator commanded toeschew all great pleasures and amusements and never to touch them;whereas in the matter of pains or fears which we have just beendiscussing, he thought that they who from infancy had always avoidedpains and fears and sorrows, when they were compelled to face themwould run away from those who were hardened in them, and wouldbecome their subjects. Now the legislator ought to have consideredthat this was equally true of pleasure; he should have said tohimself, that if our citizens are from their youth upward unacquaintedwith the greatest pleasures, and unused to endure amid the temptationsof pleasure, and are not disciplined to refrain from all thingsevil, the sweet feeling of pleasure will overcome them just as fearwould overcome the former class; and in another, and even a worsemanner, they will be the slaves of those who are able to endure amidpleasures, and have had the opportunity of enjoying them, they beingoften the worst of mankind. One half of their souls will be a slave,the other half free; and they will not be worthy to be called in thetrue sense men and freemen. Tell me whether you assent to my words?
Cle. On first hearing, what you say appears to be the truth; butto be hasty in coming to a conclusion about such important matterswould be very childish and simple.
Ath. Suppose, Cleinias and Megillus, that we consider the virtuewhich follows next of those which we intended to discuss (for aftercourage comes temperance), what institutions shall we find relating totemperance, either in Crete or Lacedaemon, which, like your militaryinstitutions, differ from those of any ordinary state.
Meg. That is not an easy question to answer; still I should say thatthe common meals and gymnastic exercises have been excellently devisedfor the promotion both of temperance and courage.
Ath. There seems to be a difficulty, Stranger, with regard tostates, in making words and facts coincide so that there can be nodispute about them. As in the human body, the regimen which doesgood in one way does harm in another; and we can hardly say that anyone course of treatment is adapted to a particular constitution. Nowthe gymnasia and common meals do a great deal of good, and yet theyare a source of evil in civil troubles; as is shown in the case of theMilesian, and Boeotian, and Thurian youth, among whom theseinstitutions seem always to have had a tendency to degrade the ancientand natural custom of love below the level, not only of man, but ofthe beasts. The charge may be fairly brought against your cities aboveall others, and is true also of most other states which especiallycultivate gymnastics. Whether such matters are to be regardedjestingly or seriously, I think that the pleasure is to be deemednatural which arises out of the intercourse between men and women; butthat the intercourse of men with men, or of women with women, iscontrary to nature, and that the bold attempt was originally due tounbridled lust. The Cretans are always accused of having inventedthe story of Ganymede and Zeus because they wanted to justifythemselves in the enjoyment of unnatural pleasures by the practiceof the god whom they believe to have been their lawgiver. Leavingthe story, we may observe that any speculation about laws turns almostentirely on pleasure and pain, both in states and in individuals:these are two fountains which nature lets flow, and he who drawsfrom them where and when, and as much as he ought, is happy; andthis holds of men and animals-of individuals as well as states; and hewho indulges in them ignorantly and at the wrong time, is thereverse of happy.
Meg. I admit, Stranger, that your words are well spoken, and Ihardly know what to say in answer to you; but still I think that theSpartan lawgiver was quite right in forbidding pleasure. Of the Cretanlaws, I shall leave the defence to my Cnosian friend. But the lawsof Sparta, in as far as they relate to pleasure, appear to me to bethe best in the world; for that which leads mankind in general intothe wildest pleasure and licence, and every other folly, the law hasclean driven out; and neither in the country nor in towns which areunder the control of Sparta, will you find revelries and the manyincitements of every kind of pleasure which accompany them; and anyone who meets a drunken and disorderly person, will immediately havehim most severely punished, and will not let him off on anypretence, not even at the time of a Dionysiac festival; although Ihave remarked that this may happen at your performances "on the cart,"as they are called; and among our Tarentine colonists I have seenthe whole city drunk at a Dionysiac festival; but nothing of thesort happens among us.
Ath. O Lacedaemonian Stranger, these festivities are praiseworthywhere there is a spirit of endurance, but are very senseless when theyare under no regulations. In order to retaliate, an Athenian hasonly to point out the licence which exists among your women. To allsuch accusations, whether they are brought against the Tarentines,or us, or you, there is one answer which exonerates the practice inquestion from impropriety. When a stranger expresses wonder at thesingularity of what he sees, any inhabitant will naturally answerhim:-Wonder not, O stranger; this is our custom, and you may verylikely have some other custom about the same things. Now we arespeaking, my friends, not about men in general, but about the meritsand defects of the lawgivers themselves. Let us then discourse alittle more at length about intoxication, which is a very importantsubject, and will seriously task the discrimination of the legislator.I am not speaking of drinking, or not drinking, wine at all, but ofintoxication. Are we to follow the custom of the Scythians, andPersians, and Carthaginians, and Celts, and Iberians, and Thracians,who are all warlike nations, or that of your countrymen, for they,as you say, altogether abstain? But the Scythians and Thracians,both men and women, drink unmixed wine, which they pour on theirgarments, and this they think a happy and glorious institution. ThePersians, again, are much given to other practices of luxury which youreject, but they have more moderation in them than the Thracians andScythians.
Meg. O best of men, we have only to take arms into our hands, and wesend all these nations flying before us.
Ath. Nay, my good friend, do not say that; there have been, as therealways will be, flights and pursuits of which no account can be given,and therefore we cannot say that victory or defeat in battle affordsmore than a doubtful proof of the goodness or badness of institutions.For when the greater states conquer and enslave the lesser, as theSyracusans have done the Locrians, who appear to be thebest-governed people in their part of the world, or as the Athenianshave done the Ceans (and there are ten thousand other instances of thesame sort of thing), all this is not to the point; let us endeavourrather to form a conclusion about each institution in itself and saynothing, at present, of victories and defeats. Let us only say thatsuch and such a custom is honourable, and another not. And firstpermit me to tell you how good and bad are to be estimated inreference to these very matters.
Meg. How do you mean?
Ath. All those who are ready at a moment's notice to praise orcensure any practice which is matter of discussion, seem to me toproceed in a wrong way. Let me give you an illustration of what Imean:-You may suppose a person to be praising wheat as a good kindof food, whereupon another person instantly blames wheat, without everenquiring into its effect or use, or in what way, or to whom, orwith what, or in what state and how, wheat is to be given. And that isjust what we are doing in this discussion. At the very mention ofthe word intoxication, one side is ready with their praises and theother with their censures; which is absurd. For either side adducetheir witnesses and approvers, and some of us think that we speak withauthority because we have many witnesses; and others because theysee those who abstain conquering in battle, and this again is disputedby us. Now I cannot say that I shall be satisfied, if we go ondiscussing each of the remaining laws in the same way. And aboutthis very point of intoxication I should like to speak in another way,which I hold to be the right one; for if number is to be thecriterion, are there not myriads upon myriads of nations ready todispute the point with you, who are only two cities?
Meg. I shall gladly welcome any method of enquiry which is right.
Ath. Let me put the matter thus:-Suppose a person to praise thekeeping of goats, and the creatures themselves as capital things tohave, and then some one who had seen goats feeding without agoatherd in cultivated spots, and doing mischief, were to censure agoat or any other animal who has no keeper, or a bad keeper, wouldthere be any sense or justice in such censure?
Meg. Certainly not.
Ath. Does a captain require only to have nautical knowledge in orderto be a good captain, whether he is sea-sick or not? What do you say?
Meg. I say that he is not a good captain if, although he havenautical skill, he is liable to sea-sickness.
Ath. And what would you say of the commander of an army? Will hebe able to command merely because he has military skill if he be acoward, who, when danger comes, is sick and drunk with fear?
Meg. Impossible.
Ath. And what if besides being a coward he has no skill?
Meg. He is a miserable fellow, not fit to be a commander of men, butonly of old women.
Ath. And what would you say of some one who blames or praises anysort of meeting which is intended by nature to have a ruler, and iswell enough when under his presidency? The critic, however, hasnever seen the society meeting together at an orderly feast underthe control of a president, but always without a ruler or with a badone:-when observers of this class praise or blame such meetings, arewe to suppose that what they say is of any value?
Meg. Certainly not, if they have never seen or been present atsuch a meeting when rightly ordered.
Ath. Reflect; may not banqueters and banquets be said toconstitute a kind of meeting?
Meg. Of course.
Ath. And did any one ever see this sort of convivial meeting rightlyordered? Of course you two will answer that you have never seen themat all, because they are not customary or lawful in your country;but I have come across many of them in many different places, andmoreover I have made enquiries about them wherever I went, as I maysay, and never did I see or hear of anything of the kind which wascarried on altogether rightly; in some few particulars they might beright, but in general they were utterly wrong.
Cle. What do you mean, Stranger, by this remark? Explain; For we, asyou say, from our inexperience in such matters, might very likelynot know, even if they came in our way, what was right or wrong insuch societies.
Ath. Likely enough; then let me try to be your instructor: You wouldacknowledge, would you not, that in all gatherings of man, kind, ofwhatever sort, there ought to be a leader?
Cle. Certainly I should.
Ath. And we were saying just now, that when men are at war theleader ought to be a brave man?
Cle. We were.
Ath. The brave man is less likely than the coward to be disturbed byfears?
Cle. That again is true.
Ath. And if there were a possibility of having a general of anarmy who was absolutely fearless and imperturbable, should we not byall means appoint him?
Cle. Assuredly.
Ath. Now, however, we are speaking not of a general who is tocommand an army, when foe meets foe in time of war, but of one whois to regulate meetings of another sort, when friend meets friend intime of peace.
Cle. True.
Ath. And that sort of meeting, if attended with drunkenness, isapt to be unquiet.
Cle. Certainly; the reverse of quiet.
Ath. In the first place, then, the revellers as well as the soldierswill require a ruler?
Cle. To be sure; no men more so.
Ath. And we ought, if possible, to provide them with a quiet ruler?
Cle. Of course.
Ath. And he should be a man who understands society; for his duty isto preserve the friendly feelings which exist among the company at thetime, and to increase them for the future by his use of the occasion.
Cle. Very true.
Ath. Must we not appoint a sober man and a wise to be our masterof the revels? For if the ruler of drinkers be himself young anddrunken, and not over-wise, only by some special good fortune willhe be saved from doing some great evil.
Cle. It will be by a singular good fortune that he is saved.
Ath. Now suppose such associations to be framed in the best waypossible in states, and that some one blames the very fact of theirexistence-he may very likely be right. But if he blames a practicewhich he only sees very much mismanaged, he shows in the first placethat he is not aware of the mismanagement, and also not aware thateverything done in this way will turn out to be wrong, because donewithout the superintendence of a sober ruler. Do you not see that adrunken pilot or a drunken ruler of any sort will ruin ship,chariot, army-anything, in short, of which he has the direction?
Cle. The last remark is very true, Stranger; and I see quite clearlythe advantage of an army having a good leader-he will give victoryin war to his followers, which is a very great advantage; and so ofother things. But I do not see any similar advantage which eitherindividuals or states gain from the good management of a feast; andI want you to tell me what great good will be effected, supposing thatthis drinking ordinance is duly established.
Ath. If you mean to ask what great good accrues to the state fromthe right training of a single youth, or of a single chorus-when thequestion is put in that form, we cannot deny that the good is not verygreat in any particular instance. But if you ask what is the good ofeducation in general, the answer is easy-that education makes goodmen, and that good men act nobly, and conquer their enemies in battle,because they are good. Education certainly gives victory, althoughvictory sometimes produces forgetfulness of education; for many havegrown insolent from victory in war, and this insolence hasengendered in them innumerable evils; and many a victory has beenand will be suicidal to the victors; but education is never suicidal.
Cle. You seem to imply, my friend, that convivial meetings, whenrightly ordered, are an important element of education.
Ath. Certainly I do.
Cle. And can you show that what you have been saying is true?
Ath. To be absolutely sure of the truth of matters concerningwhich there are many opinions, is an attribute of the Gods not givento man, Stranger; but I shall be very happy to tell you what Ithink, especially as we are now proposing to enter on a discussionconcerning laws and constitutions.
Cle. Your opinion, Stranger, about the questions which are now beingraised, is precisely what we want to hear.
Ath. Very good; I will try to find a way of explaining my meaning,and you shall try to have the gift of understanding me. But firstlet me make an apology. The Athenian citizen is reputed among allthe Hellenes to be a great talker, whereas Sparta is renowned forbrevity, and the Cretans have more wit than words. Now I am afraidof appearing to elicit a very long discourse out of very smallmaterials. For drinking indeed may appear to be a slight matter, andyet is one which cannot be rightly ordered according to nature,without correct principles of music; these are necessary to anyclear or satisfactory treatment of the subject, and music again runsup into education generally, and there is much to be said about allthis. What would you say then to leaving these matters for thepresent, and passing on to some other question of law?
Meg. O Athenian Stranger, let me tell you what perhaps you do notknow, that our family is the proxenus of your state. I imagine thatfrom their earliest youth all boys, when they are told that they arethe proxeni of a particular state, feel kindly towards their secondand this has certainly been my own feeling. I can well remember fromthe days of my boyhood, how, when any Lacedaemonians praised or blamedthe Athenians, they used to say to me-"See, Megillus, how ill or howwell," as the case might be, "has your state treated us"; and havingalways had to fight your battles against detractors when I heard youassailed, I became warmly attached to you. And I always like to hearthe Athenian tongue spoken; the common saying is quite true, that agood Athenian is more than ordinarily good, for he is the only man whois freely and genuinely good by the divine inspiration of his ownnature, and is not manufactured. Therefore be assured that I shalllike to hear you say whatever you have to say.
Cle. Yes, Stranger; and when you have heard me speak, say boldlywhat is in your thoughts. Let me remind you of a tie which unitesyou to Crete. You must have heard here the story of the prophetEpimenides, who was of my family, and came to Athens ten yearsbefore the Persian war, in accordance with the response of the Oracle,and offered certain sacrifices which the God commanded. TheAthenians were at that time in dread of the Persian invasion; and hesaid that for ten years they would not come, and that when theycame, they would go away again without accomplishing any of theirobjects, and would suffer more evil than they inflicted. At thattime my forefathers formed ties of hospitality with you; thusancient is the friendship which I and my parents have had for you.
Ath. You seem to be quite ready to listen; and I am also ready toperform as much as I can of an almost impossible task, which I willnevertheless attempt. At the outset of the discussion, let me definethe nature and power of education; for this is the way by which ourargument must travel onwards to the God Dionysus.
Cle. Let us proceed, if you please.
Ath. Well, then, if I tell you what are my notions of education,will you consider whether they satisfy you?
Cle. Let us hear.
Ath. According to my view, any one who would be good at anythingmust practise that thing from his youth upwards, both in sport andearnest, in its several branches: for example, he who is to be agood builder, should play at building children's houses; he who isto be a good husbandman, at tilling the ground; and those who have thecare of their education should provide them when young with mimictools. They should learn beforehand the knowledge which they willafterwards require for their art. For example, the future carpentershould learn to measure or apply the line in play; and the futurewarrior should learn riding, or some other exercise, for amusement,and the teacher should endeavour to direct the children's inclinationsand pleasures, by the help of amusements, to their final aim inlife. The most important part of education is right training in thenursery. The soul of the child in his play should be guided to thelove of that sort of excellence in which when he grows up to manhoodhe will have to be perfected. Do you agree with me thus far?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Then let us not leave the meaning of education ambiguous orill-defined. At present, when we speak in terms of praise or blameabout the bringing-up of each person, we call one man educated andanother uneducated, although the uneducated man may be sometimesvery well educated for the calling of a retail trader, or of a captainof a ship, and the like. For we are not speaking of education inthis narrower sense, but of that other education in virtue fromyouth upwards, which makes a man eagerly pursue the ideal perfectionof citizenship, and teaches him how rightly to rule and how to obey.This is the only education which, upon our view, deserves the name;that other sort of training, which aims at the acquisition of wealthor bodily strength, or mere cleverness apart from intelligence andjustice, is mean and illiberal, and is not worthy to be callededucation at all. But let us not quarrel with one another about aword, provided that the proposition which has just been granted holdgood: to wit, that those who are rightly educated generally becomegood men. Neither must we cast a slight upon education, which is thefirst and fairest thing that the best of men can ever have, and which,though liable to take a wrong direction, is capable of reformation.And this work of reformation is the great business of every manwhile he lives.
Cle. Very true; and we entirely agree with you.
Ath. And we agreed before that they are good men who are able torule themselves, and bad men who are not.
Cle. You are quite right.
Ath. Let me now proceed, if I can, to clear up the subject alittle further by an illustration which I will offer you.
Cle. Proceed.
Ath. Do we not consider each of ourselves to be one?
Cle. We do.
Ath. And each one of us has in his bosom two counsellors, bothfoolish and also antagonistic; of which we call the one pleasure,and the other pain.
Cle. Exactly.
Ath. Also there are opinions about the future, which have thegeneral name of expectations; and the specific name of fear, whenthe expectation is of pain; and of hope, when of pleasure; andfurther, there is reflection about the good or evil of them, and this,when embodied in a decree by the State, is called Law.
Cle. I am hardly able to follow you; proceed, however, as if I were.
Meg. I am in the like case.
Ath. Let us look at the matter thus: May we not conceive each ofus living beings to be a puppet of the Gods, either their playthingonly, or created with a purpose-which of the two we cannot certainlyknow? But we do know, that these affections in us are like cords andstrings, which pull us different and opposite ways, and to oppositeactions; and herein lies the difference between virtue and vice.According to the argument there is one among these cords which everyman ought to grasp and never let go, but to pull with it against allthe rest; and this is the sacred and golden cord of reason, calledby us the common law of the State; there are others which are hard andof iron, but this one is soft because golden; and there are severalother kinds. Now we ought always to cooperate with the lead of thebest, which is law. For inasmuch as reason is beautiful and gentle,and not violent, her rule must needs have ministers in order to helpthe golden principle in vanquishing the other principles. And thus themoral of the tale about our being puppets will not have been lost, andthe meaning of the expression "superior or inferior to a man's self"will become clearer; and the individual, attaining to right reasonin this matter of pulling the strings of the puppet, should liveaccording to its rule; while the city, receiving the same from somegod or from one who has knowledge of these things, should embody it ina law, to be her guide in her dealings with herself and with otherstates. In this way virtue and vice will be more clearly distinguishedby us. And when they have become clearer, education and otherinstitutions will in like manner become clearer; and in particularthat question of convivial entertainment, which may seem, perhaps,to have been a very trifling matter, and to have taken a great manymore words than were necessary.
Cle. Perhaps, however, the theme may turn out not to be unworthyof the length of discourse.
Ath. Very good; let us proceed with any enquiry which really bearson our present object.
Cle. Proceed.
Ath. Suppose that we give this puppet of ours drink-what will be theeffect on him?
Cle. Having what in view do you ask that question?
Ath. Nothing as yet; but I ask generally, when the puppet is broughtto the drink, what sort of result is likely to follow. I willendeavour to explain my meaning more clearly: what I am now askingis this-Does the drinking of wine heighten and increase pleasuresand pains, and passions and loves?
Cle. Very greatly.
Ath. And are perception and memory, and opinion and prudence,heightened and increased? Do not these qualities entirely desert a manif he becomes saturated with drink?
Cle. Yes, they entirely desert him.
Ath. Does he not return to the state of soul in which he was whena young child?
Cle. He does.
Ath. Then at that time he will have the least control over himself?
Cle. The least.
Ath. And will he not be in a most wretched plight?
Cle. Most wretched.
Ath. Then not only an old man but also a drunkard becomes a secondtime a child?
Cle. Well said, Stranger.
Ath. Is there any argument which will prove to us that we ought toencourage the taste for drinking instead of doing all we can toavoid it?
Cle. I suppose that there is; you at any rate, were just nowsaying that you were ready to maintain such a doctrine.
Ath. True, I was; and I am ready still, seeing that you have bothdeclared that you are anxious to hear me.
Cle. To sure we are, if only for the strangeness of the paradox,which asserts that a man ought of his own accord to plunge intoutter degradation.
Ath. Are you speaking of the soul?
Cle. Yes.
Ath. And what would you say about the body, my friend? Are you notsurprised at any one of his own accord bringing upon himselfdeformity, leanness, ugliness, decrepitude?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Yet when a man goes of his own accord to a doctor's shop, andtakes medicine, is he not aware that soon, and for many daysafterwards, he will be in a state of body which he would die ratherthan accept as the permanent condition of his life? Are not thosewho train in gymnasia, at first beginning reduced to a state ofweakness?
Cle. Yes, all that is well known.
Ath. Also that they go of their own accord for the sake of thesubsequent benefit?
Cle. Very good.
Ath. And we may conceive this to be true in the same way of otherpractices?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. And the same view may be taken of the pastime of drinking wine,if we are right in supposing that the same good effect follows?
Cle. To be sure.
Ath. If such convivialities should turn out to have any advantageequal in importance to that of gymnastic, they are in their verynature to be preferred to mere bodily exercise, inasmuch as theyhave no accompaniment of pain.
Cle. True; but I hardly think that we shall be able to discoverany such benefits to be derived from them.
Ath. That is just what we must endeavour to show. And let me ask youa question:-Do we not distinguish two kinds of fear, which are verydifferent?
Cle. What are they?
Ath. There is the fear of expected evil.
Cle. Yes.
Ath. And there is the fear of an evil reputation; we are afraidof being thought evil, because we do or say some dishonourablething, which fear we and all men term shame.
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. These are the two fears, as I called them; one of which isthe opposite of pain and other fears, and the opposite also of thegreatest and most numerous sort of pleasures.
Cle. Very true.
Ath. And does not the legislator and every one who is good foranything, hold this fear in the greatest honour? This is what he termsreverence, and the confidence which is the reverse of this he termsinsolence; and the latter he always deems to be a very great evil bothto individuals and to states.
Cle. True.
Ath. Does not this kind of fear preserve us in many importantways? What is there which so surely gives victory and safety in war?For there are two things which give victory-confidence before enemies,and fear of disgrace before friends.
Cle. There are.
Ath. Then each of us should be fearless and also fearful; and why weshould be either has now been determined.
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. And when we want to make any one fearless, we and the law bringhim face to face with many fears.
Cle. Clearly.
Ath. And when we want to make him rightly fearful, must we notintroduce him to shameless pleasures, and train him to take up armsagainst them, and to overcome them? Or does this principle apply tocourage only, and must he who would be perfect in valour fight againstand overcome his own natural character-since if he be unpractisedand inexperienced in such conflicts, he will not be half the man whichhe might have been-and are we to suppose, that with temperance it isotherwise, and that he who has never fought with the shameless andunrighteous temptations of his pleasures and lusts, and conqueredthem, in earnest and in play, by word, deed, and act, will still beperfectly temperate?
Cle. A most unlikely supposition.
Ath. Suppose that some God had given a fear-potion to men, andthat the more a man drank of this the more he regarded himself atevery draught as a child of misfortune, and that he fearedeverything happening or about to happen to him; and that at last themost courageous of men utterly lost his presence of mind for a time,and only came to himself again when he had slept off the influenceof the draught.
Cle. But has such a draught, Stranger, ever really been knownamong men?
Ath. No; but, if there had been, might not such a draught havebeen of use to the legislator as a test of courage? Might we not goand say to him, "O legislator, whether you are legislating for theCretan, or for any other state, would you not like to have atouchstone of the courage and cowardice of your citizens?"
Cle. "I should," will be the answer of every one.
Ath. "And you would rather have a touchstone in which there is norisk and no great danger than the reverse?"
Cle. In that proposition every one may safely agree.
Ath. "And in order to make use of the draught, you would lead themamid these imaginary terrors, and prove them, when the affection offear was working upon them, and compel them to be fearless,exhorting and admonishing them; and also honouring them, butdishonouring any one who will not be persuaded by you to be in allrespects such as you command him; and if he underwent the trial welland manfully, you would let him go unscathed; but if ill, you wouldinflict a punishment upon him? Or would you abstain from using thepotion altogether, although you have no reason for abstaining?"
Cle. He would be certain, Stranger, to use the potion.
Ath. This would be a mode of testing and training which would bewonderfully easy in comparison with those now in use, and might beapplied to a single person, or to a few, or indeed to any number;and he would do well who provided himself with the potion only, ratherthan with any number of other things, whether he preferred to be byhimself in solitude, and there contend with his fears, because hewas ashamed to be seen by the eye of man until he was perfect; ortrusting to the force of his own nature and habits, and believing thathe had been already disciplined sufficiently, he did not hesitate totrain himself in company with any number of others, and display hispower in conquering the irresistible change effected by thedraught-his virtue being such, that he never in any instance fell intoany great unseemliness, but was always himself, and left off before hearrived at the last cup, fearing that he, like all other men, might beovercome by the potion.
Cle. Yes, Stranger, in that last case, too, he might equally showhis self-control.
Ath. Let us return to the lawgiver, and say to him:-"Well, lawgiver,there is certainly no such fear-potion which man has either receivedfrom the Gods or himself discovered; for witchcraft has no place atour board. But is there any potion which might serve as a test ofoverboldness and excessive and indiscreet boasting?
Cle. I suppose that he will say, Yes-meaning that wine is such apotion.
Ath. Is not the effect of this quite the opposite of the effect ofthe other? When a man drinks wine he begins to be better pleasedwith himself, and the more he drinks the more he is filled full ofbrave hopes, and conceit of his power, and at last the string of histongue is loosened, and fancying himself wise, he is brimming overwith lawlessness, and has no more fear or respect, and is ready todo or say anything.
Cle. I think that every one will admit the truth of yourdescription.
Meg. Certainly.
Ath. Now, let us remember, as we were saying, that there are twothings which should be cultivated in the soul: first, the greatestcourage; secondly, the greatest fear-
Cle. Which you said to be characteristic of reverence, if I am notmistaken.
Ath. Thank you for reminding me. But now, as the habit of courageand fearlessness is to be trained amid fears, let us considerwhether the opposite quality is not also to be trained amongopposites.
Cle. That is probably the case.
Ath. There are times and seasons at which we are by nature more thancommonly valiant and bold; now we ought to train ourselves on theseoccasions to be as free from impudence and shamelessness aspossible, and to be afraid to say or suffer or do anything that isbase.
Cle. True.
Ath. Are not the moments in which we are apt to be bold andshameless such as these?-when we are under the influence of anger,love, pride, ignorance, avarice, cowardice? or when wealth, beauty,strength, and all the intoxicating workings of pleasure madden us?What is better adapted than the festive use of wine, in the firstplace to test, and in the second place to train the character of aman, if care be taken in the use of it? What is there cheaper, or moreinnocent? For do but consider which is the greater risk:-Would yourather test a man of a morose and savage nature, which is the sourceof ten thousand acts of injustice, by making bargains with him at arisk to yourself, or by having him as a companion at the festival ofDionysus? Or would you, if you wanted to apply a touchstone to a manwho is prone to love, entrust your wife, or your sons, or daughters tohim, perilling your dearest interests in order to have a view of thecondition of his soul? I might mention numberless cases, in whichthe advantage would be manifest of getting to know a character insport, and without paying dearly for experience. And I do notbelieve that either a Cretan, or any other man, will doubt that such atest is a fair test, and safer, cheaper, and speedier than any other.
Cle. That is certainly true.
Ath. And this knowledge of the natures and habits of men's soulswill be of the greatest use in that art which has the management ofthem; and that art, if I am not mistaken, is politics.
Cle. Exactly so.
 

IndexNext

 