
  
BOOK X

And now having spoken of assaults, let us sum up all acts ofviolence under a single law, which shall be as follows:-No one shalltake or carry away any of his neighbour's goods, neither shall heuse anything which is his neighbour's without the consent of theowner; for these are the offences which are and have been, and willever be, the source of all the aforesaid evils. The greatest of themare excesses and insolences of youth, and are offences against thegreatest when they are done against religion; and especially greatwhen in violation of public and holy rites, or of the partly-commonrites in which tribes and phratries share; and in the second degreegreat when they are committed against private rites and sepulchres,and in the third degree (not to repeat the acts formerly mentioned),when insults are offered to parents; the fourth kind of violence iswhen any one, regardless of the authority of the rulers, takes orcarries away or makes use of anything which belongs to them, nothaving their consent; and the fifth kind is when the violation ofthe civil rights of an individual demands reparation. There shouldbe a common law embracing all these cases. For we have already said ingeneral terms what shall be the punishment of sacrilege, whetherfraudulent or violent, and now we have to determine what is to bethe punishment of those who speak or act insolently toward the Gods.But first we must give them an admonition which may be in thefollowing terms:-No one who in obedience to the laws believed thatthere were Gods, ever intentionally did any unholy act, or uttered anyunlawful word; but he who did must have supposed one of threethings-either that they did not exist,-which is the first possibility,or secondly, that, if they did, they took no care of man, orthirdly, that they were easily appeased and turned aside from theirpurpose, by sacrifices and prayers.
Cleinias. What shall we say or do to these persons?
Athenian Stranger. My good friend, let us first hear the jests whichI suspect that they in their superiority will utter against us.
Cle. What jests?
Ath. They will make some irreverent speech of this sort:-"Oinhabitants of Athens, and Sparta, and Cnosus," they will reply, "inthat you speak truly; for some of us deny the very existence of theGods, while others, as you say, are of opinion that they do not careabout us; and others that they are turned from their course bygifts. Now we have a right to claim, as you yourself allowed, in thematter of laws, that before you are hard upon us and threaten us,you should argue with us and convince us-you should first attempt toteach and persuade us that there are Gods by reasonable evidences, andalso that they are too good to be unrighteous, or to be propitiated,or turned from their course by gifts. For when we hear such thingssaid of them by those who are esteemed to be the best of poets, andorators, and prophets, and priests, and by innumerable others, thethoughts of most of us are not set upon abstaining from unrighteousacts, but upon doing them and atoning for them. When lawgivers professthat they are gentle and not stern, we think that they should first ofall use persuasion to us, and show us the existence of Gods, if not ina better manner than other men, at any rate in a truer; and whoknows but that we shall hearken to you? If then our request is afair one, please to accept our challenge."
Cle. But is there any difficulty in proving the existence of theGods?
Ath. How would you prove it?
Cle. How? In the first place, the earth and the sun, and the starsand the universe, and the fair order of the seasons, and thedivision of them into years and months, furnish proofs of theirexistence; and also there is the fact that all Hellenes and barbariansbelieve in them.
Ath. I fear, my sweet friend, though I will not say that I muchregard, the contempt with which the profane will be likely to assailus. For you do not understand the nature of their complaint, and youfancy that they rush into impiety only from a love of sensualpleasure.
Cle. Why, Stranger, what other reason is there?
Ath. One which you who live in a different atmosphere would neverguess.
Cle. What is it?
Ath. A very grievous sort of ignorance which is imagined to be thegreatest wisdom.
Cle. What do you mean?
Ath. At Athens there are tales preserved in writing which the virtueof your state, as I am informed, refuses to admit. They speak of theGods in prose as well as verse, and the oldest of them tell of theorigin of the heavens and of the world, and not far from the beginningof their story they proceed to narrate the birth of the Gods, andhow after they were born they behaved to one another. Whether thesestories have in other ways a good or a bad influence, I should notlike to be severe upon them, because they are ancient; but, looking atthem with reference to the duties of children to their parents, Icannot praise them, or think that they are useful, or at all true.Of the words of the ancients I have nothing more to say; and Ishould wish to say of them only what is pleasing to the Gods. But asto our younger generation and their wisdom, I cannot let them off whenthey do mischief. For do but mark the effect of their words: whenyou and I argue for the existence of the Gods, and produce the sun,moon, stars, and earth, claiming for them a divine being, if wewould listen to the aforesaid philosophers we should say that they areearth and stones only, which can have no care at all of human affairs,and that all religion is a cooking up of words and a make-believe.
Cle. One such teacher, O Stranger, would be bad enough, and youimply that there are many of them, which is worse.
Ath. Well, then; what shall we say or do?-Shall we assume thatsome one is accusing us among unholy men, who are trying to escapefrom the effect of our legislation; and that they say of us-Howdreadful that you should legislate on the supposition that there areGods! Shall we make a defence of ourselves? or shall we leave them andreturn to our laws, lest the prelude should become longer than thelaw? For the discourse will certainly extend to great length, if weare to treat the impiously disposed as they desire, partlydemonstrating to them at some length the things of which they demandan explanation, partly making them afraid or dissatisfied, and thenproceed to the requisite enactments.
Cle. Yes, Stranger; but then how often have we repeated already thaton the present occasion there is no reason why brevity should bepreferred to length; who is "at our heels"?-as the saying goes, and itwould be paltry and ridiculous to prefer the shorter to the better. Itis a matter of no small consequence, in some way or other to provethat there are Gods, and that they are good, and regard justice morethan men do. The demonstration of this would be the best and noblestprelude of all our laws. And therefore, without impatience, andwithout hurry, let us unreservedly consider the whole matter,summoning up all the power of persuasion which we possess.
Ath. Seeing you thus in earnest, I would fain offer up a prayer thatI may succeed:-but I must proceed at once. Who can be calm when heis called upon to prove the existence of the Gods? Who can avoidhating and abhorring the men who are and have been the cause of thisargument; I speak of those who will not believe the tales which theyhave heard as babes and sucklings from their mothers and nurses,repeated by them both in jest and earnest, like charms, who havealso heard them in the sacrificial prayers, and seen sightsaccompanying them-sights and sounds delightful to children-and theirparents during the sacrifices showing an intense earnestness on behalfof their children and of themselves, and with eager interest talkingto the Gods, and beseeching them, as though they were firmly convincedof their existence; who likewise see and hear the prostrations andinvocations which are made by Hellenes and barbarians at the risingand setting of the sun and moon, in all the vicissitudes of life,not as if they thought that there were no Gods, but as if therecould be no doubt of their existence, and no suspicion of theirnon-existence; when men, knowing all these things, despise them onno real grounds, as would be admitted by all who have any particleof intelligence, and when they force us to say what we are now saying,how can any one in gentle terms remonstrate with the like of them,when he has to begin by proving to them the very existence of theGods? Yet the attempt must be made; for it would be unseemly thatone half of mankind should go mad in their lust of pleasure, and theother half in their indignation at such persons. Our address tothese lost and perverted natures should not be spoken in passion;let us suppose ourselves to select some one of them, and gently reasonwith him, smothering our anger:-O my son, we will say to him, youare young, and the advance of time will make you reverse may of theopinions which you now hold. Wait awhile, and do not attempt tojudge at present of the highest things; and that is the highest ofwhich you now think nothing-to know the Gods rightly and to liveaccordingly. And in the first place let me indicate to you one pointwhich is of great importance, and about which I cannot bedeceived:-You and your friends are not the first who have held thisopinion about the Gods. There have always been persons more or lessnumerous who have had the same disorder. I have known many of them,and can tell you, that no one who had taken up in youth thisopinion, that the Gods do not exist, ever continued in the sameuntil he was old; the two other notions certainly do continue insome cases, but not in many; the notion, I mean, that the Godsexist, but take no heed of human things, and the other notion thatthey do take heed of them, but are easily propitiated withsacrifices and prayers. As to the opinion about the Gods which maysome day become clear to you, I advise you go wait and consider ifit be true or not; ask of others, and above all of the legislator.In the meantime take care that you do not offend against the Gods. Forthe duty of the legislator is and always will be to teach you thetruth of these matters.
Cle. Our address, Stranger, thus far, is excellent.
Ath. Quite true, Megillus and Cleinias, but I am afraid that we haveunconsciously lighted on a strange doctrine.
Cle. What doctrine do you mean?
Ath. The wisest of all doctrines, in the opinion of many.
Cle. I wish that you would speak plainer.
Ath. The doctrine that all things do become, have become, and willbecome, some by nature, some by art, and some by chance.
Cle. Is not that true?
Ath. Well, philosophers are probably right; at any rate we may aswell follow in their track, and examine what is the meaning of themand their disciples.
Cle. By all means.
Ath. They say that the greatest and fairest things are the work ofnature and of chance, the lesser of art, which, receiving fromnature the greater and primeval creations, moulds and fashions allthose lesser works which are generally termed artificial.
Cle. How is that?
Ath. I will explain my meaning still more clearly. They say thatfire and water, and earth and air, all exist by nature and chance, andnone of them by art, and that as to the bodies which come next inorder-earth, and sun, and moon, and stars-they have been created bymeans of these absolutely inanimate existences. The elements areseverally moved by chance and some inherent force according to certainaffinities among them-of hot with cold, or of dry with moist, or ofsoft with hard, and according to all the other accidental admixturesof opposites which have been formed by necessity. After this fashionand in this manner the whole heaven has been created, and all thatis in the heaven, as well as animals and all plants, and all theseasons come from these elements, not by the action of mind, as theysay, or of any God, or from art, but as I was saying, by nature andchance only. Art sprang up afterwards and out of these, mortal andof mortal birth, and produced in play certain images and verypartial imitations of the truth, having an affinity to one another,such as music and painting create and their companion arts. Andthere are other arts which have a serious purpose, and theseco-operate with nature, such, for example, as medicine, and husbandry,and gymnastic. And they say that politics cooperate with nature, butin a less degree, and have more of art; also that legislation isentirely a work of art, and is based on assumptions which are nottrue.
Cle. How do you mean?
Ath. In the first place, my dear friend, these people would say thatthe Gods exist not by nature, but by art, and by the laws of states,which are different in different places, according to the agreement ofthose who make them; and that the honourable is one thing by natureand another thing by law, and that the principles of justice have noexistence at all in nature, but that mankind are always disputingabout them and altering them; and that the alterations which aremade by art and by law have no basis in nature, but are of authorityfor the moment and at the time at which they are made.-These, myfriends, are the sayings of wise men, poets and prose writers, whichfind a way into the minds of youth. They are told by them that thehighest right is might, and in this way the young fall into impieties,under the idea that the Gods are not such as the law bids themimagine; and hence arise factions, these philosophers inviting them tolead a true life according to nature, that is, to live in realdominion over others, and not in legal subjection to them.
Cle. What a dreadful picture, Stranger, have you given, and howgreat is the injury which is thus inflicted on young men to the ruinboth of states and families!
Ath. True, Cleinias; but then what should the lawgiver do whenthis evil is of long standing? should he only rise up in the state andthreaten all mankind, proclaiming that if they will not say andthink that the Gods are such as the law ordains (and this may beextended generally to the honourable, the just, and to all the highestthings, and to all that relates to virtue and vice), and if theywill not make their actions conform to the copy which the law givesthem, then he who refuses to obey the law shall die, or suffer stripesand bonds, or privation of citizenship, or in some cases be punishedby loss of property and exile? Should he not rather, when he is makinglaws for men, at the same time infuse the spirit of persuasion intohis words, and mitigate the severity of them as far as he can?
Cle. Why, Stranger, if such persuasion be at all possible, then alegislator who has anything in him ought never to weary ofpersuading men; he ought to leave nothing unsaid in support of theancient opinion that there are Gods, and of all those other truthswhich you were just now mentioning; he ought to support the law andalso art, and acknowledge that both alike exist by nature, and no lessthan nature, if they are the creations of mind in accordance withright reason, you appear to me to maintain, and I am disposed to agreewith you in thinking.
Ath. Yes, my enthusiastic Cleinias; but are not these things whenspoken to a multitude hard to be understood, not to mention thatthey take up a dismal length of time?
Cle. Why, Stranger, shall we, whose patience failed not whendrinking or music were the themes of discourse, weary now ofdiscoursing about the Gods, and about divine things? And thegreatest help to rational legislation is that the laws when oncewritten down are always at rest; they can be put to the test at anyfuture time, and therefore, if on first hearing they seem difficult,there is no reason for apprehension about them, because any manhowever dull can go over them and consider them again and again; norif they are tedious but useful, is there any reason or religion, as itseems to me, in any man refusing to maintain the principles of them tothe utmost of his power.
Megillus. Stranger, I like what Cleinias is saying.
Ath. Yes, Megillus, and we should do as he proposes; for ifimpious discourses were not scattered, as I may say, throughout theworld, there would have been no need for any vindication of theexistence of the Gods-but seeing that they are spread far and wide,such arguments are needed; and who should come to the rescue of thegreatest laws, when they are being undermined by bad men, but thelegislator himself?
Meg. There is no more proper champion of them.
Ath. Well, then, tell me, Cleinias-for I must ask you to be mypartner-does not he who talks in this way conceive fire and waterand earth and air to be the first elements of all things? These hecalls nature, and out of these he supposes the soul to be formedafterwards; and this is not a mere conjecture of ours about hismeaning, but is what he really means.
Cle. Very true.
Ath. Then, by Heaven, we have discovered the source of this vainopinion of all those physical investigators; and I would have youexamine their arguments with the utmost care, for their impiety is avery serious matter; they not only make a bad and mistaken use ofargument, but they lead away the minds of others: that is my opinionof them.
Cle. You are right; but I should like to know how this happens.
Ath. I fear that the argument may seem singular.
Cle. Do not hesitate, Stranger; I see that you are afraid of sucha discussion carrying you beyond the limits of legislation. But ifthere be no other way of showing our agreement in the belief thatthere are Gods, of whom the law is said now to approve, let us takethis way, my good sir.
Ath. Then I suppose that I must repeat the singular argument ofthose who manufacture the soul according to their own impious notions;they affirm that which is the first cause of the generation anddestruction of all things, to be not first, but last, and that whichis last to be first, and hence they have fallen into error about thetrue nature of the Gods.
Cle. Still I do not understand you.
Ath. Nearly all of them, my friends, seem to be ignorant of thenature and power of the soul, especially in what relates to herorigin: they do not know that she is among the first of things, andbefore all bodies, and is the chief author of their changes andtranspositions. And if this is true, and if the soul is older than thebody, must not the things which are of the soul's kindred be ofnecessity prior to those which appertain to the body?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Then thought and attention and mind and art and law will beprior to that which is hard and soft and heavy and light; and thegreat and primitive works and actions will be works of art; theywill be the first, and after them will come nature and works ofnature, which however is a wrong term for men to apply to them;these will follow, and will be under the government of art and mind.
Cle. But why is the word "nature" wrong?
Ath. Because those who use the term mean to say that nature is thefirst creative power; but if the soul turn out to be the primevalelement, and not fire or air, then in the truest sense and beyondother things the soul may be said to exist by nature; and this wouldbe true if you proved that the soul is older than the body, but nototherwise.
Cle. You are quite right.
Ath. Shall we, then, take this as the next point to which ourattention should be directed?
Cle. By all means.
Ath. Let us be on our guard lest this most deceptive argument withits youthful looks, beguiling us old men, give us the slip and makea laughing-stock of us. Who knows but we may be aiming at the greater,and fail of attaining the lesser? Suppose that we three have to pass arapid river, and I, being the youngest of the three and experienced inrivers, take upon me the duty of making the attempt first by myself;leaving you in safety on the bank, I am to examine whether the riveris passable by older men like yourselves, and if such appears to bethe case then I shall invite you to follow, and my experience willhelp to convey you across; but if the river is impassable by you, thenthere will have been no danger to anybody but myself-would not thatseem to be a very fair proposal? I mean to say that the argument inprospect is likely to be too much for you, out of your depth andbeyond your strength, and I should be afraid that the stream of myquestions might create in you who are not in the habit of answering,giddiness and confusion of mind, and hence a feeling of unpleasantnessand unsuitableness might arise. I think therefore that I had betterfirst ask the questions and then answer them myself while you listenin safety; in that way I can carry on the argument until I havecompleted the proof that the soul is prior to the body.
Cle. Excellent, Stranger, and I hope that you will do as youpropose.
Ath. Come, then, and if ever we are to call upon the Gods, let uscall upon them now in all seriousness to come to the demonstrationof their own existence. And so holding fast to the rope we willventure upon the depths of the argument. When questions of this sortare asked of me, my safest answer would appear to be asfollows:-Some one says to me, "O Stranger, are all things at restand nothing in motion, or is the exact opposite of this true, or aresome things in motion and others at rest?-To this I shall reply thatsome things are in motion and others at rest. "And do not things whichmove a place, and are not the things which are at rest at rest in aplace?" Certainly. "And some move or rest in one place and some inmore places than one?" You mean to say, we shall rejoin, that thosethings which rest at the centre move in one place, just as thecircumference goes round of globes which are said to be at rest?"Yes." And we observe that, in the revolution, the motion whichcarries round the larger and the lesser circle at the same time isproportionally distributed to greater and smaller, and is greaterand smaller in a certain proportion. Here is a wonder which might bethought an impossibility, that the same motion should impart swiftnessand slowness in due proportion to larger and lesser circles. "Verytrue." And when you speak of bodies moving in many places, you seem tome to mean those which move from one place to another, and sometimeshave one centre of motion and sometimes more than one because theyturn upon their axis; and whenever they meet anything, if it bestationary, they are divided by it; but if they get in the midstbetween bodies which are approaching and moving towards the samespot from opposite directions, they unite with them. "I admit thetruth of what you are saying." Also when they unite they grow, andwhen they are divided they waste away-that is, supposing theconstitution of each to remain, or if that fails, then there is asecond reason of their dissolution. "And when are all things createdand how?" Clearly, they are created when the first principlereceives increase and attains to the second dimension, and from thisarrives at the one which is neighbour to this, and after reachingthe third becomes perceptible to sense. Everything which is thuschanging and moving is in process of generation; only when at rest hasit real existence, but when passing into another state it is destroyedutterly. Have we not mentioned all motions that there are, andcomprehended them under their kinds and numbered them with theexception, my friends, of two?
Cle. Which are they?
Ath. Just the two, with which our present enquiry is concerned.
Cle. Speak plainer.
Ath. I suppose that our enquiry has reference to the soul?
Cle. Very true.
Ath. Let us assume that there is a motion able to move other things,but not to move itself;-that is one kind; and there is another kindwhich can move itself as well as other things, working incomposition and decomposition, by increase and diminution andgeneration and destruction-that is also one of the many kinds ofmotion.
Cle. Granted.
Ath. And we will assume that which moves other, and is changed byother, to be the ninth, and that which changes itself and others,and is co-incident with every action and every passion, and is thetrue principle of change and motion in all that is-that we shall beinclined to call the tenth.
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. And which of these ten motions ought we to prefer as beingthe mightiest and most efficient?
Cle. I must say that the motion which is able to move itself isten thousand times superior to all the others.
Ath. Very good; but may I make one or two corrections in what I havebeen saying?
Cle. What are they?
Ath. When I spoke of the tenth sort of motion, that was not quitecorrect.
Cle. What was the error?
Ath. According to the true order, the tenth was really the firstin generation and power; then follows the second, which wasstrangely enough termed the ninth by us.
Cle. What do you mean?
Ath. I mean this: when one thing changes another, and thatanother, of such will there be any primary changing element? How can athing which is moved by another ever be the beginning of change?Impossible. But when the self-moved changes other, and that againother, and thus thousands upon tens of thousands of bodies are setin motion, must not the beginning of all this motion be the changeof the self-moving principle?
Cle. Very true, and I quite agree.
Ath. Or, to put the question in another way, making answer toourselves:-If, as most of these philosophers have the audacity toaffirm, all things were at rest in one mass, which of theabove-mentioned principles of motion would first spring up among them?
Cle. Clearly the self-moving; for there could be no change in themarising out of any external cause; the change must first take place inthemselves.
Ath. Then we must say that self-motion being the origin of allmotions, and the first which arises among things at rest as well asamong things in motion, is the eldest and mightiest principle ofchange, and that which is changed by another and yet moves other issecond.
Cle. Quite true.
Ath. At this stage of the argument let us put a question.
Cle. What question?
Ath. If we were to see this power existing in any earthy, watery, orfiery substance, simple or compound-how should we describe it?
Cle. You mean to ask whether we should call such a self-moving powerlife?
Ath. I do.
Cle. Certainly we should.
Ath. And when we see soul in anything, must we not do thesame-must we not admit that this is life?
Cle. We must.
Ath. And now, I beseech you, reflect;-you would admit that we have athreefold knowledge of things?
Cle. What do you mean?
Ath. I mean that we know the essence, and that we know thedefinition of the essence, and the name,-these are the three; andthere are two questions which may be raised about anything.
Cle. How two?
Ath. Sometimes a person may give the name and ask the definition; orhe may give the definition and ask the name. I may illustrate what Imean in this way.
Cle. How?
Ath. Number like some other things is capable of being dividedinto equal parts; when thus divided, number is named "even," and thedefinition of the name "even" is "number divisible into two equalparts"?
Cle. True.
Ath. I mean, that when we are asked about the definition and givethe name, or when we are asked about the name and give thedefinition-in either case, whether we give name or definition, wespeak of the same thing, calling "even" the number which is dividedinto two equal parts.
Cle. Quite true.
Ath. And what is the definition of that which is named "soul"? Canwe conceive of any other than that which has been already given-themotion which can move itself?
Cle. You mean to say that the essence which is defined as theself-moved is the same with that which has the name soul?
Ath. Yes; and if this is true, do we still maintain that there isanything wanting in the proof that the soul is the first origin andmoving power of all that is, or has become, or will be, and theircontraries, when she has been clearly shown to be the source of changeand motion in all things?
Cle. Certainly not; the soul as being the source of motion, has beenmost satisfactorily shown to be the oldest of all things.
Ath. And is not that motion which is produced in another, byreason of another, but never has any self-moving power at all, beingin truth the change of an inanimate body, to be reckoned second, or byany lower number which you may prefer?
Cle. Exactly.
Ath. Then we are right, and speak the most perfect and absolutetruth, when we say that the soul is prior to the body, and that thebody is second and comes afterwards, and is born to obey the soul,which is the ruler?
Cle. Nothing can be more true.
Ath. Do you remember our old admission, that if the soul was priorto the body the things of the soul were also prior to those of thebody?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Then characters and manners, and wishes and reasonings, andtrue opinions, and reflections, and recollections are prior tolength and breadth and depth and strength of bodies, if the soul isprior to the body.
Cle. To be sure.
Ath. In the next place, must we not of necessity admit that the soulis the cause of good and evil, base and honourable, just and unjust,and of all other opposites, if we suppose her to be the cause of allthings?
Cle. We must.
Ath. And as the soul orders and inhabits all things that move,however moving, must we not say that she orders also the heavens?
Cle. Of course.
Ath. One soul or more? More than one-I will answer for you; at anyrate, we must not suppose that there are less than two-one theauthor of good, and the other of evil.
Cle. Very true.
Ath. Yes, very true; the soul then directs all things in heaven, andearth, and sea by her movements, and these are described by theterms-will, consideration, attention, deliberation, opinion true andfalse, joy and sorrow, confidence, fear, hatred, love, and otherprimary motions akin to these; which again receive the secondarymotions of corporeal substances, and guide all things to growth anddecay, to composition and decomposition, and to the qualities whichaccompany them, such as heat and cold, heaviness and lightness,hardness and softness, blackness and whiteness, bitterness andsweetness, and all those other qualities which the soul uses,herself a goddess, when truly receiving the divine mind shedisciplines all things rightly to their happiness; but when she is thecompanion of folly, she does the very contrary of all this. Shall weassume so much, or do we still entertain doubts?
Cle. There is no room at all for doubt.
Ath. Shall we say then that it is the soul which controls heaven andearth, and the whole world?-that it is a principle of wisdom andvirtue, or a principle which has neither wisdom nor virtue? Supposethat we make answer as follows:-
Cle. How would you answer?
Ath. If, my friend, we say that the whole path and movement ofheaven, and of all that is therein, is by nature akin to themovement and revolution and calculation of mind, and proceeds bykindred laws, then, as is plain, we must say that the best soultakes care of the world and guides it along the good path.
Cle. True.
Ath. But if the world moves wildly and irregularly, then the evilsoul guides it.
Cle. True again.
Ath. Of what nature is the movement of mind?-To this question itis not easy to give an intelligent answer; and therefore I ought toassist you in framing one.
Cle. Very good.
Ath. Then let us not answer as if we would look straight at the sun,making ourselves darkness at midday-I mean as if we were under theimpression that we could see with mortal eyes, or know adequatelythe nature of mind;-it will be safer to look at the image only.
Cle. What do you mean?
Ath. Let us select of the ten motions the one which mind chieflyresembles; this I will bring to your recollection, and will thenmake the answer on behalf of us all.
Cle. That will be excellent.
Ath. You will surely remember our saying that all things were eitherat rest or in motion?
Cle. I do.
Ath. And that of things in motion some were moving in one place, andothers in more than one?
Cle. Yes.
Ath. Of these two kinds of motion, that which moves in one placemust move about a centre like globes made in a lathe, and is mostentirely akin and similar to the circular movement of mind.
Cle. What do you mean?
Ath. In saying that both mind and the motion which is in one placemove in the same and like manner, in and about the same, and inrelation to the same, and according to one proportion and order, andare like the motion of a globe, we invented a fair image, which doesno discredit to our ingenuity.
Cle. It does us great credit.
Ath. And the motion of the other sort which is not after the samemanner, nor in the same, nor about the same, nor in relation to thesame, nor in one place, nor in order, nor according to any rule orproportion, may be said to be akin to senselessness and folly?
Cle. That is most true.
Ath. Then, after what has been said, there is no difficulty indistinctly stating, that since soul carries all things round, eitherthe best soul or the contrary must of necessity carry round andorder and arrange the revolution of the heaven.
Cle. And judging from what has been said, Stranger, there would beimpiety in asserting that any but the most perfect soul or soulscarries round the heavens.
Ath. You have understood my meaning right well, Cleinias, and nowlet me ask you another question.
Cle. What are you going to ask?
Ath. If the soul carries round the sun and moon, and the otherstars, does she not carry round each individual of them?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Then of one of them let us speak, and the same argument willapply to all.
Cle. Which will you take?
Ath. Every one sees the body of the sun, but no one sees his soul,nor the soul of any other body living or dead; and yet there isgreat reason to believe that this nature, unperceived by any of oursenses, is circumfused around them all, but is perceived by mind;and therefore by mind and reflection only let us apprehend thefollowing point.
Cle. What is that?
Ath. If the soul carries round the sun, we shall not be far wrong insupposing one of three alternatives.
Cle. What are they?
Ath. Either the soul which moves the sun this way and that,resides within the circular and visible body, like the soul whichcarries us about every way; or the soul provides herself with anexternal body of fire or air, as some affirm, and violently propelsbody by body; or thirdly, she is without such abody, but guides thesun by some extraordinary and wonderful power.
Cle. Yes, certainly; the soul can only order all things in one ofthese three ways.
Ath. And this soul of the sun, which is therefore better than thesun, whether taking the sun about in a chariot to give light to men,or acting from without or in whatever way, ought by every man to bedeemed a God.
Cle. Yes, by every man who has the least particle of sense.
Ath. And of the stars too, and of the moon, and of the years andmonths and seasons, must we not say in like manner, that since asoul or souls having every sort of excellence are the causes of all ofthem, those souls are Gods, whether they are living beings andreside in bodies, and in this way order the whole heaven, orwhatever be the place and mode of their existence;-and will any onewho admits all this venture to deny that all things full of Gods?
Cle. No one, Stranger, would be such a madman.
Ath. And now, Megillus and Cleinias, let us offer terms to him whohas hitherto denied the existence of the Gods, and leave him.
Cle. What terms?
Ath. Either he shall teach us that we were wrong in saying thatthe soul is the original of all things, and arguing accordingly; or,if he be not able to say anything better, then he must yield to us andlive for the remainder of his life in the belief that there areGods.-Let us see, then, whether we have said enough or not enough tothose who deny that there are Gods.
Cle. Certainly-quite enough, Stranger.
Ath. Then to them we will say no more. And now we are to address himwho, believing that there are Gods, believes also that they take noheed of human affairs: To him we say-O thou best of men, inbelieving that there are Gods you are led by some affinity to them,which attracts you towards your kindred and makes you honour andbelieve in them. But the fortunes of evil and unrighteous men inprivate as well as public life, which, though not really happy, arewrongly counted happy in the judgment of men, and are celebratedboth by poets and prose writers-these draw you aside from your naturalpiety. Perhaps you have seen impious men growing old and leaving theirchildren's children in high offices, and their prosperity shakesyour faith-you have known or heard or been yourself an eyewitness ofmany monstrous impieties, and have beheld men by such criminalmeans from small beginnings attaining to sovereignty and thepinnacle of greatness; and considering all these things you do notlike to accuse the Gods of them, because they are your relatives;and so from some want of reasoning power, and also from anunwillingness to find fault with them, you have come to believe thatthey exist indeed, but have no thought or care of human things. Now,that your present evil opinion may not grow to still greaterimpiety, and that we may if possible use arguments which may conjureaway the evil before it arrives, we will add another argument tothat originally addressed to him who utterly denied the existence ofthe Gods. And do you, Megillus and Cleinias, answer for the youngman as you did before; and if any impediment comes in our way, Iwill take the word out of your mouths, and carry you over the river asI did just now.
Cle. Very good; do as you say, and we will help you as well as wecan.
Ath. There will probably be no difficulty in proving to him that theGods care about the small as well as about the great. For he waspresent and heard what was said, that they are perfectly good, andthat the care of all things is most entirely natural to them.
Cle. No doubt he heard that.
Ath. Let us consider together in the next place what we mean by thisvirtue which we ascribe to them. Surely we should say that to betemperate and to possess mind belongs to virtue, and the contrary tovice?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. Yes; and courage is a part of virtue, and cowardice of vice?
Cle. True.
Ath. And the one is honourable, and the other dishonourable?
Cle. To be sure.
Ath. And the one, like other meaner things, is a human quality,but the Gods have no part in anything of the sort?
Cle. That again is what everybody will admit.
Ath. But do we imagine carelessness and idleness and luxury to bevirtues? What do you think?
Cle. Decidedly not.
Ath. They rank under the opposite class?
Cle. Yes.
Ath. And their opposites, therefore, would fall under the oppositeclass?
Cle. Yes.
Ath. But are we to suppose that one who possesses all these goodqualities will be luxurious and heedless and idle, like those whom thepoet compares to stingless drones?
Cle. And the comparison is a most just one.
Ath. Surely God must not be supposed to have a nature which hehimself hates?-he who dares to say this sort of thing must not betolerated for a moment.
Cle. Of course not. How could he have?
Ath. Should we not on any principle be entirely mistaken in praisingany one who has some special business entrusted to him, if he have amind which takes care of great matters and no care of small ones?Reflect; he who acts in this way, whether he be God or man, must actfrom one of two principles.
Cle. What are they?
Ath. Either he must think that the neglect of the small matters isof no consequence to the whole, or if he knows that they are ofconsequence, and he neglects them, his neglect must be attributed tocarelessness and indolence. Is there any other way in which hisneglect can be explained? For surely, when it is impossible for him totake care of all, he is not negligent if he fails to attend to thesethings great or small, which a God or some inferior being might bewanting in strength or capacity to manage?
Cle. Certainly not.
Ath. Now, then, let us examine the offenders, who both alike confessthat there are Gods, but with a difference-the one saying that theymay be appeased, and the other that they have no care of smallmatters: there are three of us and two of them, and we will say tothem-In the first place, you both acknowledge that the Gods hear andsee and know all things, and that nothing can escape them which ismatter of sense and knowledge:-do you admit this?
Cle. Yes.
Ath. And do you admit also that they have all power which mortalsand immortals can have?
Cle. They will, of course, admit this also.
Ath. And surely we three and they two-five in all-haveacknowledged that they are good and perfect?
Cle. Assuredly.
Ath. But, if they are such as we conceive them to be, can wepossibly suppose that they ever act in the spirit of carelessnessand indolence? For in us inactivity is the child of cowardice, andcarelessness of inactivity and indolence.
Cle. Most true.
Ath. Then not from inactivity and carelessness is any God evernegligent; for there is no cowardice in them.
Cle. That is very true.
Ath. Then the alternative which remains is, that if the Gods neglectthe lighter and lesser concerns of the universe, they neglect thembecause they know that they ought not to care about suchmatters-what other alternative is there but the opposite of theirknowing?
Cle. There is none.
Ath. And, O most excellent and best of men, do I understand you tomean that they are careless because they are ignorant, and do not knowthat they ought to take care, or that they know, and yet like themeanest sort of men, knowing the better, choose the worse because theyare overcome by pleasures and pains?
Cle. Impossible.
Ath. Do not all human things partake of the nature of soul? And isnot man the most religious of all animals?
Cle. That is not to be denied.
Ath. And we acknowledge that all mortal creatures are the propertyof the Gods, to whom also the whole of heaven belongs?
Cle. Certainly.
Ath. And, therefore, whether a person says that these things areto the Gods great or small-in either case it would not be naturalfor the Gods who own us, and who are the most careful and the bestof owners to neglect us.-There is also a further consideration.
Cle. What is it?
Ath. Sensation and power are in an inverse ratio to each other inrespect to their case and difficulty.
Cle. What do you mean?
Ath. I mean that there is greater difficulty in seeing and hearingthe small than the great, but more facility in moving andcontrolling and taking care of and unimportant things than of theiropposites.
Cle. Far more.
Ath. Suppose the case of a physician who is willing and able to curesome living thing as a whole-how will the whole fare at his hands ifhe takes care only of the greater and neglects the parts which arelesser?
Cle. Decidedly not well.
Ath. No better would be the result with pilots or generals, orhouseholders or statesmen, or any other such class, if theyneglected the small and regarded only the great;-as the builderssay, the larger stones do not lie well without the lesser.
Cle. Of course not.
Ath. Let us not, then, deem God inferior to human workmen, who, inproportion to their skill, finish and perfect their works, small aswell as great, by one and the same art; or that God, the wisest ofbeings, who is both willing and able to take care, is like a lazygood-for-nothing, or a coward, who turns his back upon labour andgives no thought to smaller and easier matters, but to the greateronly.
Cle. Never, Stranger, let us admit a supposition about the Godswhich is both impious and false.
Ath. I think that we have now argued enough with him who delights toaccuse the Gods of neglect.
Cle. Yes.
Ath. He has been forced to acknowledge that he is in error, but hestill seems to me to need some words of consolation.
Cle. What consolation will you offer him?
Ath. Let us say to the youth:-The ruler of the universe hasordered all things with a view to the excellence and preservation ofthe whole, and each part, as far as may be, has an action andpassion appropriate to it. Over these, down to the least fraction ofthem, ministers have been appointed to preside, who have wrought outtheir perfection with infinitesimal exactness. And one of theseportions of the universe is thine own, unhappy man, which, howeverlittle, contributes to the whole; and you do not seem to be aware thatthis and every other creation is for the sake of the whole, and inorder that the life of the whole may be blessed; and that you arecreated for the sake of the whole, and not the whole for the sake ofyou. For every physician and every skilled artist does all thingsfor the sake of the whole, directing his effort towards the commongood, executing the part for the sake of the whole, and not thewhole for the sake of the part. And you are annoyed because you areignorant how what is best for you happens to you and to theuniverse, as far as the laws of the common creation admit. Now, as thesoul combining first with one body and then with another undergoes allsorts of changes, either of herself, or through the influence ofanother soul, all that remains to the player of the game is that heshould shift the pieces; sending the better nature to the betterplace, and the worse to the worse, and so assigning to them theirproper portion.
Cle. In what way do you mean?
Ath. In a way which may be supposed to make the care of all thingseasy to the Gods. If any one were to form or fashion all thingswithout any regard to the whole-if, for example, he formed a livingelement of water out of fire, instead of forming many things out ofone or one out of many in regular order attaining to a first or secondor third birth, the transmutation would have been infinite; but nowthe ruler of the world has a wonderfully easy task.
Cle. How so?
Ath. I will explain:-When the king saw that our actions had life,and that there was much virtue in them and much vice, and that thesoul and body, although not, like the Gods of popular opinion,eternal, yet having once come into existence, were indestructible (forif either of them had been destroyed, there would have been nogeneration of living beings); and when he observed that the good ofthe soul was ever by nature designed to profit men, and the evil toharm them-he, seeing all this, contrived so to place each of the partsthat their position might in the easiest and best manner procure thevictory of good and the defeat of evil in the whole. And hecontrived a general plan by which a thing of a certain nature founda certain seat and room. But the formation of qualities he left to thewills of individuals. For every one of us is made pretty much whathe is by the bent of his desires and the nature of his soul.
Cle. Yes, that is probably true.
Ath. Then all things which have a soul change, and possess inthemselves a principle of change, and in changing move according tolaw and to the order of destiny: natures which have undergone a lesserchange move less and on the earth's surface, but those which havesuffered more change and have become more criminal sink into theabyss, that is to say, into Hades and other places in the world below,of which the very names terrify men, and which they picture tothemselves as in a dream, both while alive and when released fromthe body. And whenever the soul receives more of good or evil from herown energy and the strong influence of others-when she has communionwith divine virtue and becomes divine, she is carried into another andbetter place, which is perfect in holiness; but when she has communionwith evil, then she also changes the Place of her life.
This is the justice of the Gods who inhabit Olympus.O youth or young man, who fancy that you are neglected by the Gods,know that if you become worse you shall go to the worse souls, or ifbetter to the better, and in every succession of life and death youwill do and suffer what like may fitly suffer at the hands of like.This is the justice of heaven, which neither you nor any otherunfortunate will ever glory in escaping, and which the ordainingpowers have specially ordained; take good heed thereof, for it will besure to take heed of you. If you say:-I am small and will creep intothe depths of the earth, or I am high and will fly up to heaven, youare not so small or so high but that you shall pay the fittingpenalty, either here or in the world below or in some still moresavage place whither you shall be conveyed. This is also theexplanation of the fate of those whom you saw, who had done unholy andevil deeds, and from small beginnings had grown great, and you fanciedthat from being miserable they had become happy; and in their actions,as in a mirror, you seemed to see the universal neglect of the Gods,not knowing how they make all things work together and contribute tothe great whole. And thinkest thou, bold man, that thou needest not toknow this?-he who knows it not can never form any true idea of thehappiness or unhappiness of life or hold any rational discourserespecting either. If Cleinias and this our reverend company succeedin bringing to you that you know not what you say of the Gods, thenwill God help you; but should you desire to hear more, listen towhat we say to the third opponent, if you have any understandingwhatsoever. For I think that we have sufficiently proved the existenceof the Gods, and that they care for men:-The other notion that theyare appeased by the wicked, and take gifts, is what we must notconcede to any one, and what every man should disprove to the utmostof his power.
Cle. Very good; let us do as you say.
Ath. Well, then, by the Gods themselves I conjure you to tellme-if they are to be propitiated, how are they to be propitiated?Who are they, and what is their nature? Must they not be at leastrulers who have to order unceasingly the whole heaven?
Cle. True.
Ath. And to what earthly rulers can they be compared, or who tothem? How in the less can we find an image of the greater? Are theycharioteers of contending pairs of steeds, or pilots of vessels?Perhaps they might be compared to the generals of armies, or theymight be likened to physicians providing against the diseases whichmake war upon the body, or to husbandmen observing anxiously theeffects of the seasons on the growth of plants; or I perhaps, toshepherds of flocks. For as we acknowledge the world to be full ofmany goods and also of evils, and of more evils than goods, thereis, as we affirm, an immortal conflict going on among us, whichrequires marvellous watchfulness; and in that conflict the Gods anddemigods are our allies, and we are their property. Injustice andinsolence and folly are the destruction of us, and justice andtemperance and wisdom are our salvation; and the place of these latteris in the life of the Gods, although some vestige of them mayoccasionally be discerned among mankind. But upon this earth we knowthat there dwell souls possessing an unjust spirit, who may becompared to brute animals, which fawn upon their keepers, whether dogsor shepherds, or the best and most perfect masters; for they in likemanner, as the voices of the wicked declare, prevail by flattery andprayers and incantations, and are allowed to make their gains withimpunity. And this sin, which is termed dishonesty, is an evil ofthe same kind as what is termed disease in living bodies or pestilencein years or seasons of the year, and in cities and governments hasanother name, which is injustice.
Cle. Quite true.
Ath. What else can he say who declares that the Gods are alwayslenient to the doers of unjust acts, if they divide the spoil withthem? As if wolves were to toss a portion of their prey to the dogs,and they, mollified by the gift, suffered them to tear the flocks.Must not he who maintains that the Gods can be propitiated argue thus?
Cle. Precisely so.
Ath. And to which of the above-mentioned classes of guardianswould any man compare the Gods without absurdity? Will he say thatthey are like pilots, who are themselves turned away from their dutyby "libations of wine and the savour of fat," and at last overturnboth ship and sailors?
Cle. Assuredly not.
Ath. And surely they are not like charioteers who are bribed to giveup the victory to other chariots?
Cle. That would be a fearful image of the Gods.
Ath. Nor are they like generals, or physicians, or husbandmen, orshepherds; and no one would compare them to dogs who have silencedby wolves.
Cle. A thing not to be spoken of.
Ath. And are not all the Gods the chiefest of all guardians, anddo they not guard our highest interests?
Cle. Yes; the chiefest.
Ath. And shall we say that those who guard our noblest interests,and are the best of guardians, are inferior in virtue to dogs, andto men even of moderate excellence, who would never betray justice forthe sake of gifts which unjust men impiously offer them?
Cle. Certainly not: nor is such a notion to be endured, and he whoholds this opinion may be fairly singled out and characterized as ofall impious men the wickedest and most impious.
Ath. Then are the three assertions-that the Gods exist, and thatthey take care of men, and that they can never be persuaded to doinjustice, now sufficiently demonstrated? May we say that they are?
Cle. You have our entire assent to your words.
Ath. I have spoken with vehemence because I am zealous againstevil men; and I will tell dear Cleinias, why I am so. I would not havethe wicked think that, having the superiority in argument, they may doas they please and act according to their various imaginations aboutthe Gods; and this zeal has led me to speak too vehemently; but ifwe have at all succeeded in persuading the men to hate themselvesand love their opposites, the prelude of our laws about impiety willnot have been spoken in vain.
Cle. So let us hope; and even if we have failed, the style of ourargument will not discredit the lawgiver.
Ath. After the prelude shall follow a discourse, which will be theinterpreter of the law; this shall proclaim to all impiouspersons:-that they must depart from their ways and go over to thepious. And to those who disobey, let the law about impiety be asfollows:-If a man is guilty of any impiety in word or deed, any onewho happens to present shall give information to the magistrates, inaid of the law; and let the magistrates who. first receive theinformation bring him before the appointed court according to the law;and if a magistrate, after receiving information, refuses to act, heshall be tried for impiety at the instance of any one who is willingto vindicate the laws; and if any one be cast, the court shallestimate the punishment of each act of impiety; and let all suchcriminals be imprisoned. There shall be three prisons in the state:the first of them is to be the common prison in the neighbourhood ofthe agora for the safe-keeping of the generality of offenders; anotheris to be in the neighbourhood of the nocturnal council, and is to becalled the "House of Reformation"; another, to be situated in somewild and desolate region in the centre of the country, shall be calledby some name expressive of retribution. Now, men fall into impietyfrom three causes, which have been already mentioned, and from each ofthese causes arise two sorts of impiety, in all six, which are worthdistinguishing, and should not all have the same punishment. For hewho does not believe in Gods, and yet has a righteous nature, hatesthe wicked and dislikes and refuses to do injustice, and avoidsunrighteous men, and loves the righteous. But they who besidesbelieving that the world is devoid of Gods are intemperate, and haveat the same time good memories and quick wits, are worse; althoughboth of them are unbelievers, much less injury is done by the one thanby the other. The one may talk loosely about the Gods and aboutsacrifices and oaths, and perhaps by laughing at other men he may makethem like himself, if he be not punished. But the other who holdsthe same opinions and is called a clever man, is full of stratagem anddeceit-men of this class deal in prophecy and jugglery of all kinds,and out of their ranks sometimes come tyrants and demagogues andgenerals and hierophants of private mysteries and the Sophists, asthey are termed, with their ingenious devices. There are many kinds ofunbelievers, but two only for whom legislation is required; one thehypocritical sort, whose crime is deserving of death many timesover, while the other needs only bonds and admonition. In likemanner also the notion that the Gods take no thought of men producestwo other sorts of crimes, and the notion that they may be propitiatedproduces two more. Assuming these divisions, let those who have beenmade what they are only from want of understanding, and not frommalice or an evil nature, be placed by the judge in the House ofReformation, and ordered to suffer imprisonment during a period of notless than five years. And in the meantime let them have no intercoursewith the other citizens, except with members of the nocturnal council,and with them let them converse with a view to the improvement oftheir soul's health. And when the time of their imprisonment hasexpired, if any of them be of sound mind let him be restored to sanecompany, but if not, and if he be condemned a second time, let himbe punished with death. As to that class of monstrous natures whonot only believe that there are no Gods, or that they are negligent,or to be propitiated, but in contempt of mankind conjure the soulsof the living and say that they can conjure the dead and promise tocharm the Gods with sacrifices and prayers, and will utterly overthrowindividuals and whole houses and states for the sake of money-lethim who is guilty of any of these things be condemned by the courtto be bound according to law in the prison which is in the centre ofthe land, and let no freeman ever approach him, but let him receivethe rations of food appointed by the guardians of the law from thehands of the public slaves; and when he is dead let him be cast beyondthe borders unburied, and if any freeman assist in burying him, lethim pay the penalty of impiety to any one who is willing to bring asuit against him. But if he leaves behind him children who are fitto be citizens, let the guardians of orphans take care of them, justas they would of any other orphans, from the day on which their fatheris convicted.
In all these cases there should be one law, which will make men ingeneral less liable to transgress in word or deed, and less foolish,because they will not be allowed to practise religious ritescontrary to law. And let this be the simple form of the law:-No manshall have sacred rites in a private house. When he would sacrifice,let him go to the temples and hand over his offerings to the priestsand priestesses, who see to the sanctity of such things, and let himpray himself, and let any one who pleases join with him in prayer. Thereason of this is as follows:-Gods and temples are not easilyinstituted, and to establish them rightly is the work of a mightyintellect. And women especially, and men too, when they are sick or indanger, or in any sort of difficulty, or again on their receivingany good fortune, have a way of consecrating the occasion, vowingsacrifices, and promising shrines to Gods, demigods, and sons of Gods;and when they are awakened by terrible apparitions and dreams orremember visions, they find in altars and temples the remedies ofthem, and will fill every house and village with them, placing them inthe open air, or wherever they may have had such visions; and with aview to all these cases we should obey the law. The law has alsoregard to the impious, and would not have them fancy that by thesecret performance of these actions-by raising temples and by buildingaltars in private houses, they can propitiate the God secretly withsacrifices and prayers, while they are really multiplying their crimesinfinitely, bringing guilt from heaven upon themselves, and alsoupon those who permit them, and who are better men than they are;and the consequence is that the whole state reaps the fruit of theirimpiety, which, in a certain sense, is deserved. Assuredly God willnot blame the legislator, who will enact the following law:-No oneshall possess shrines of the Gods in private houses, and he who isfound to possess them, and perform any sacred rites not publiclyauthorized-supposing the offender to be some man or woman who is notguilty of any other great and impious crime-shall be informedagainst by him who is acquainted with the fact, which shall beannounced by him to the guardians of the law; and let them issueorders that he or she shall carry away their private rites to thepublic temples, and if they do not persuade them, let them inflict apenalty on them until they comply. And if a person be proven guilty ofimpiety, not merely from childish levity, but such as grown-up men maybe guilty of, whether he have sacrificed publicly or privately toany Gods, let him be punished with death, for his sacrifice is impure.Whether the deed has been done in earnest, or only from childishlevity, let the guardians of the law determine, before they bringthe matter into court and prosecute the offender for impiety.
 

LastIndexNext

 