
  
BOOK I 

SOCRATES - GLAUCON
I WENT down yesterday to the Piraeus with Glaucon the son ofAriston, that I might offer up my prayers to the goddess; and alsobecause I wanted to see in what manner they would celebrate thefestival, which was a new thing. I was delighted with the processionof the inhabitants; but that of the Thracians was equally, if notmore, beautiful. When we had finished our prayers and viewed thespectacle, we turned in the direction of the city; and at that instantPolemarchus the son of Cephalus chanced to catch sight of us from adistance as we were starting on our way home, and told his servantto run and bid us wait for him. The servant took hold of me by thecloak behind, and said: Polemarchus desires you to wait.
I turned round, and asked him where his master was.
There he is, said the youth, coming after you, if you will onlywait.
Certainly we will, said Glaucon; and in a few minutes Polemarchusappeared, and with him Adeimantus, Glaucon's brother, Niceratus theson of Nicias, and several others who had been at the procession.
SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS - GLAUCON - ADEIMANTUS
Polemarchus said to me: I perceive, Socrates, that you and ourcompanion are already on your way to the city.
You are not far wrong, I said.
But do you see, he rejoined, how many we are?
Of course.
And are you stronger than all these? for if not, you will have toremain where you are.
May there not be the alternative, I said, that we may persuade youto let us go?
But can you persuade us, if we refuse to listen to you? he said.
Certainly not, replied Glaucon.
Then we are not going to listen; of that you may be assured.
Adeimantus added: Has no one told you of the torch-race on horsebackin honour of the goddess which will take place in the evening?
With horses! I replied: That is a novelty. Will horsemen carrytorches and pass them one to another during the race?
Yes, said Polemarchus, and not only so, but a festival will hecelebrated at night, which you certainly ought to see. Let us risesoon after supper and see this festival; there will be a gatheringof young men, and we will have a good talk. Stay then, and do not beperverse.
Glaucon said: I suppose, since you insist, that we must.
Very good, I replied.
GLAUCON - CEPHALUS - SOCRATES
Accordingly we went with Polemarchus to his house; and there wefound his brothers Lysias and Euthydemus, and with them Thrasymachusthe Chalcedonian, Charmantides the Paeanian, and Cleitophon the son ofAristonymus. There too was Cephalus the father of Polemarchus, whomI had not seen for a long time, and I thought him very much aged. Hewas seated on a cushioned chair, and had a garland on his head, for hehad been sacrificing in the court; and there were some other chairs inthe room arranged in a semicircle, upon which we sat down by him. Hesaluted me eagerly, and then he said: --
You don't come to see me, Socrates, as often as you ought: If I werestill able to go and see you I would not ask you to come to me. But atmy age I can hardly get to the city, and therefore you should comeoftener to the Piraeus. For let me tell you, that the more thepleasures of the body fade away, the greater to me is the pleasure andcharm of conversation. Do not then deny my request, but make our houseyour resort and keep company with these young men; we are old friends,and you will be quite at home with us.
I replied: There is nothing which for my part I like better,Cephalus, than conversing with aged men; for I regard them astravellers who have gone a journey which I too may have to go, andof whom I ought to enquire, whether the way is smooth and easy, orrugged and difficult. And this is a question which I should like toask of you who have arrived at that time which the poets call the'threshold of old age' --Is life harder towards the end, or whatreport do you give of it?
I will tell you, Socrates, he said, what my own feeling is. Men ofmy age flock together; we are birds of a feather, as the old proverbsays; and at our meetings the tale of my acquaintance commonly is--I cannot eat, I cannot drink; the pleasures of youth and love arefled away: there was a good time once, but now that is gone, andlife is no longer life. Some complain of the slights which are putupon them by relations, and they will tell you sadly of how many evilstheir old age is the cause. But to me, Socrates, these complainersseem to blame that which is not really in fault. For if old age werethe cause, I too being old, and every other old man, would have feltas they do. But this is not my own experience, nor that of others whomI have known. How well I remember the aged poet Sophocles, when inanswer to the question, How does love suit with age, Sophocles,--are you still the man you were? Peace, he replied; most gladlyhave I escaped the thing of which you speak; I feel as if I hadescaped from a mad and furious master. His words have often occurredto my mind since, and they seem as good to me now as at the timewhen he uttered them. For certainly old age has a great sense ofcalm and freedom; when the passions relax their hold, then, asSophocles says, we are freed from the grasp not of one mad masteronly, but of many. The truth is, Socrates, that these regrets, andalso the complaints about relations, are to be attributed to thesame cause, which is not old age, but men's characters and tempers;for he who is of a calm and happy nature will hardly feel the pressureof age, but to him who is of an opposite disposition youth and age areequally a burden.
I listened in admiration, and wanting to draw him out, that he mightgo on --Yes, Cephalus, I said: but I rather suspect that people ingeneral are not convinced by you when you speak thus; they thinkthat old age sits lightly upon you, not because of your happydisposition, but because you are rich, and wealth is well known tobe a great comforter.
You are right, he replied; they are not convinced: and there issomething in what they say; not, however, so much as they imagine. Imight answer them as Themistocles answered the Seriphian who wasabusing him and saying that he was famous, not for his own meritsbut because he was an Athenian: 'If you had been a native of mycountry or I of yours, neither of us would have been famous.' And tothose who are not rich and are impatient of old age, the same replymay be made; for to the good poor man old age cannot be a lightburden, nor can a bad rich man ever have peace with himself.
May I ask, Cephalus, whether your fortune was for the most partinherited or acquired by you?
Acquired! Socrates; do you want to know how much I acquired? Inthe art of making money I have been midway between my father andgrandfather: for my grandfather, whose name I bear, doubled andtrebled the value of his patrimony, that which he inherited being muchwhat I possess now; but my father Lysanias reduced the propertybelow what it is at present: and I shall be satisfied if I leave tothese my sons not less but a little more than I received.
That was why I asked you the question, I replied, because I see thatyou are indifferent about money, which is a characteristic rather ofthose who have inherited their fortunes than of those who haveacquired them; the makers of fortunes have a second love of money as acreation of their own, resembling the affection of authors for theirown poems, or of parents for their children, besides that natural loveof it for the sake of use and profit which is common to them and allmen. And hence they are very bad company, for they can talk aboutnothing but the praises of wealth. That is true, he said.
Yes, that is very true, but may I ask another question? What doyou consider to be the greatest blessing which you have reaped fromyour wealth?
One, he said, of which I could not expect easily to convince others.For let me tell you, Socrates, that when a man thinks himself to benear death, fears and cares enter into his mind which he never hadbefore; the tales of a world below and the punishment which is exactedthere of deeds done here were once a laughing matter to him, but nowhe is tormented with the thought that they may be true: either fromthe weakness of age, or because he is now drawing nearer to that otherplace, he has a clearer view of these things; suspicions and alarmscrowd thickly upon him, and he begins to reflect and consider whatwrongs he has done to others. And when he finds that the sum of histransgressions is great he will many a time like a child start up inhis sleep for fear, and he is filled with dark forebodings. But to himwho is conscious of no sin, sweet hope, as Pindar charmingly says,is the kind nurse of his age:
Hope, he says, cherishes the soul of him who lives in justice andholiness and is the nurse of his age and the companion of his journey;--hope which is mightiest to sway the restless soul of man.
How admirable are his words! And the great blessing of riches, Ido not say to every man, but to a good man, is, that he has had nooccasion to deceive or to defraud others, either intentionally orunintentionally; and when he departs to the world below he is not inany apprehension about offerings due to the gods or debts which heowes to men. Now to this peace of mind the possession of wealthgreatly contributes; and therefore I say, that, setting one thingagainst another, of the many advantages which wealth has to give, to aman of sense this is in my opinion the greatest.
Well said, Cephalus, I replied; but as concerning justice, what isit? --to speak the truth and to pay your debts --no more than this?And even to this are there not exceptions? Suppose that a friendwhen in his right mind has deposited arms with me and he asks for themwhen he is not in his right mind, ought I to give them back to him? Noone would say that I ought or that I should be right in doing so,any more than they would say that I ought always to speak the truth toone who is in his condition.
You are quite right, he replied.
But then, I said, speaking the truth and paying your debts is nota correct definition of justice.
CEPHALUS - SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS
Quite correct, Socrates, if Simonides is to be believed, saidPolemarchus interposing.
I fear, said Cephalus, that I must go now, for I have to lookafter the sacrifices, and I hand over the argument to Polemarchusand the company.
Is not Polemarchus your heir? I said.
To be sure, he answered, and went away laughing to the sacrifices.
SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS
Tell me then, O thou heir of the argument, what did Simonides say,and according to you truly say, about justice?
He said that the repayment of a debt is just, and in saying so heappears to me to be right.
I should be sorry to doubt the word of such a wise and inspired man,but his meaning, though probably clear to you, is the reverse of clearto me. For he certainly does not mean, as we were now saying that Iought to return a return a deposit of arms or of anything else toone who asks for it when he is not in his right senses; and yet adeposit cannot be denied to be a debt.
True.
Then when the person who asks me is not in his right mind I am by nomeans to make the return?
Certainly not.
When Simonides said that the repayment of a debt was justice, he didnot mean to include that case?
Certainly not; for he thinks that a friend ought always to do goodto a friend and never evil.
You mean that the return of a deposit of gold which is to the injuryof the receiver, if the two parties are friends, is not therepayment of a debt, --that is what you would imagine him to say?
Yes.
And are enemies also to receive what we owe to them?
To be sure, he said, they are to receive what we owe them, and anenemy, as I take it, owes to an enemy that which is due or proper tohim --that is to say, evil.
Simonides, then, after the manner of poets, would seem to havespoken darkly of the nature of justice; for he really meant to saythat justice is the giving to each man what is proper to him, and thishe termed a debt.
That must have been his meaning, he said.
By heaven! I replied; and if we asked him what due or proper thingis given by medicine, and to whom, what answer do you think that hewould make to us?
He would surely reply that medicine gives drugs and meat and drinkto human bodies.
And what due or proper thing is given by cookery, and to what?
Seasoning to food.
And what is that which justice gives, and to whom?
If, Socrates, we are to be guided at all by the analogy of thepreceding instances, then justice is the art which gives good tofriends and evil to enemies.
That is his meaning then?
I think so.
And who is best able to do good to his friends and evil to hisenemies in time of sickness?
The physician.
Or when they are on a voyage, amid the perils of the sea?
The pilot.
And in what sort of actions or with a view to what result is thejust man most able to do harm to his enemy and good to his friends?
In going to war against the one and in making alliances with theother.
But when a man is well, my dear Polemarchus, there is no need of aphysician?
No.
And he who is not on a voyage has no need of a pilot?
No.
Then in time of peace justice will be of no use?
I am very far from thinking so.
You think that justice may be of use in peace as well as in war?
Yes.
Like husbandry for the acquisition of corn?
Yes.
Or like shoemaking for the acquisition of shoes, --that is whatyou mean?
Yes.
And what similar use or power of acquisition has justice in timeof peace?
In contracts, Socrates, justice is of use.
And by contracts you mean partnerships?
Exactly.
But is the just man or the skilful player a more useful and betterpartner at a game of draughts?
The skilful player.
And in the laying of bricks and stones is the just man a more usefulor better partner than the builder?
Quite the reverse.
Then in what sort of partnership is the just man a better partnerthan the harp-player, as in playing the harp the harp-player iscertainly a better partner than the just man?
In a money partnership.
Yes, Polemarchus, but surely not in the use of money; for you do notwant a just man to be your counsellor the purchase or sale of a horse;a man who is knowing about horses would be better for that, would henot?
Certainly.
And when you want to buy a ship, the shipwright or the pilot wouldbe better?
True.
Then what is that joint use of silver or gold in which the justman is to be preferred?
When you want a deposit to be kept safely.
You mean when money is not wanted, but allowed to lie?
Precisely.
That is to say, justice is useful when money is useless?
That is the inference.
And when you want to keep a pruning-hook safe, then justice isuseful to the individual and to the state; but when you want to useit, then the art of the vine-dresser?
Clearly.
And when you want to keep a shield or a lyre, and not to use them,you would say that justice is useful; but when you want to use them,then the art of the soldier or of the musician?
Certainly.
And so of all the other things; --justice is useful when they areuseless, and useless when they are useful?
That is the inference.
Then justice is not good for much. But let us consider thisfurther point: Is not he who can best strike a blow in a boxingmatch or in any kind of fighting best able to ward off a blow?
Certainly.
And he who is most skilful in preventing or escaping from adisease is best able to create one?
True.
And he is the best guard of a camp who is best able to steal a marchupon the enemy?
Certainly.
Then he who is a good keeper of anything is also a good thief?
That, I suppose, is to be inferred.
Then if the just man is good at keeping money, he is good atstealing it.
That is implied in the argument.
Then after all the just man has turned out to be a thief. And thisis a lesson which I suspect you must have learnt out of Homer; for he,speaking of Autolycus, the maternal grandfather of Odysseus, who isa favourite of his, affirms that
He was excellent above all men in theft and perjury.And so, you and Homer and Simonides are agreed that justice is anart of theft; to be practised however 'for the good of friends and forthe harm of enemies,' --that was what you were saying?
No, certainly not that, though I do not now know what I did say; butI still stand by the latter words.
Well, there is another question: By friends and enemies do we meanthose who are so really, or only in seeming?
Surely, he said, a man may be expected to love those whom hethinks good, and to hate those whom he thinks evil.
Yes, but do not persons often err about good and evil: many whoare not good seem to be so, and conversely?
That is true.
Then to them the good will be enemies and the evil will be theirfriends? True.
And in that case they will be right in doing good to the evil andevil to the good?
Clearly.
But the good are just and would not do an injustice?
True.
Then according to your argument it is just to injure those who do nowrong?
Nay, Socrates; the doctrine is immoral.
Then I suppose that we ought to do good to the just and harm tothe unjust?
I like that better.
But see the consequence: --Many a man who is ignorant of humannature has friends who are bad friends, and in that case he ought todo harm to them; and he has good enemies whom he ought to benefit;but, if so, we shall be saying the very opposite of that which weaffirmed to be the meaning of Simonides.
Very true, he said: and I think that we had better correct anerror into which we seem to have fallen in the use of the words'friend' and 'enemy.'
What was the error, Polemarchus? I asked.
We assumed that he is a friend who seems to be or who is thoughtgood.
And how is the error to be corrected?
We should rather say that he is a friend who is, as well as seems,good; and that he who seems only, and is not good, only seems to beand is not a friend; and of an enemy the same may be said.
You would argue that the good are our friends and the bad ourenemies?
Yes.
And instead of saying simply as we did at first, that it is justto do good to our friends and harm to our enemies, we should furthersay: It is just to do good to our friends when they are good andharm to our enemies when they are evil?
Yes, that appears to me to be the truth.
But ought the just to injure any one at all?
Undoubtedly he ought to injure those who are both wicked and hisenemies.
When horses are injured, are they improved or deteriorated?
The latter.
Deteriorated, that is to say, in the good qualities of horses, notof dogs?
Yes, of horses.
And dogs are deteriorated in the good qualities of dogs, and notof horses?
Of course.
And will not men who are injured be deteriorated in that which isthe proper virtue of man?
Certainly.
And that human virtue is justice?
To be sure.
Then men who are injured are of necessity made unjust?
That is the result.
But can the musician by his art make men unmusical?
Certainly not.
Or the horseman by his art make them bad horsemen?
Impossible.
And can the just by justice make men unjust, or speaking general canthe good by virtue make them bad?
Assuredly not.
Any more than heat can produce cold?
It cannot.
Or drought moisture?
Clearly not.
Nor can the good harm any one?
Impossible.
And the just is the good?
Certainly.
Then to injure a friend or any one else is not the act of a justman, but of the opposite, who is the unjust?
I think that what you say is quite true, Socrates.
Then if a man says that justice consists in the repayment ofdebts, and that good is the debt which a man owes to his friends,and evil the debt which he owes to his enemies, --to say this is notwise; for it is not true, if, as has been clearly shown, theinjuring of another can be in no case just.
I agree with you, said Polemarchus.
Then you and I are prepared to take up arms against any one whoattributes such a saying to Simonides or Bias or Pittacus, or anyother wise man or seer?
I am quite ready to do battle at your side, he said.
Shall I tell you whose I believe the saying to be?
Whose?
I believe that Periander or Perdiccas or Xerxes or Ismenias theTheban, or some other rich and mighty man, who had a great opinionof his own power, was the first to say that justice is 'doing goodto your friends and harm to your enemies.'
Most true, he said.
Yes, I said; but if this definition of justice also breaks down,what other can be offered?
Several times in the course of the discussion Thrasymachus hadmade an attempt to get the argument into his own hands, and had beenput down by the rest of the company, who wanted to hear the end. Butwhen Polemarchus and I had done speaking and there was a pause, hecould no longer hold his peace; and, gathering himself up, he cameat us like a wild beast, seeking to devour us. We were quitepanic-stricken at the sight of him.
SOCRATES - POLEMARCHUS - THRASYMACHUS
He roared out to the whole company: What folly. Socrates, hastaken possession of you all? And why, sillybillies, do you knock underto one another? I say that if you want really to know what justice is,you should not only ask but answer, and you should not seek honourto yourself from the refutation of an opponent, but have your ownanswer; for there is many a one who can ask and cannot answer. And nowI will not have you say that justice is duty or advantage or profit orgain or interest, for this sort of nonsense will not do for me; I musthave clearness and accuracy.
I was panic-stricken at his words, and could not look at him withouttrembling. Indeed I believe that if I had not fixed my eye upon him, Ishould have been struck dumb: but when I saw his fury rising, I lookedat him first, and was therefore able to reply to him.
Thrasymachus, I said, with a quiver, don't be hard upon us.Polemarchus and I may have been guilty of a little mistake in theargument, but I can assure you that the error was not intentional.If we were seeking for a piece of gold, you would not imagine thatwe were 'knocking under to one another,' and so losing our chance offinding it. And why, when we are seeking for justice, a thing moreprecious than many pieces of gold, do you say that we are weaklyyielding to one another and not doing our utmost to get at thetruth? Nay, my good friend, we are most willing and anxious to doso, but the fact is that we cannot. And if so, you people who know allthings should pity us and not be angry with us.
How characteristic of Socrates! he replied, with a bitter laugh;--that's your ironical style! Did I not foresee --have I not alreadytold you, that whatever he was asked he would refuse to answer, andtry irony or any other shuffle, in order that he might avoidanswering?
You are a philosopher, Thrasymachus, I replied, and well know thatif you ask a person what numbers make up twelve, taking care toprohibit him whom you ask from answering twice six, or three timesfour, or six times two, or four times three, 'for this sort ofnonsense will not do for me,' --then obviously, that is your way ofputting the question, no one can answer you. But suppose that hewere to retort, 'Thrasymachus, what do you mean? If one of thesenumbers which you interdict be the true answer to the question, am Ifalsely to say some other number which is not the right one? --is thatyour meaning?' -How would you answer him?
Just as if the two cases were at all alike! he said.
Why should they not be? I replied; and even if they are not, butonly appear to be so to the person who is asked, ought he not to saywhat he thinks, whether you and I forbid him or not?
I presume then that you are going to make one of the interdictedanswers?
I dare say that I may, notwithstanding the danger, if uponreflection I approve of any of them.
But what if I give you an answer about justice other and better,he said, than any of these? What do you deserve to have done to you?
Done to me! --as becomes the ignorant, I must learn from the wise--that is what I deserve to have done to me.
What, and no payment! a pleasant notion!
I will pay when I have the money, I replied.
SOCRATES - THRASYMACHUS - GLAUCON
But you have, Socrates, said Glaucon: and you, Thrasymachus, need beunder no anxiety about money, for we will all make a contributionfor Socrates.
Yes, he replied, and then Socrates will do as he always does--refuse to answer himself, but take and pull to pieces the answerof some one else.
Why, my good friend, I said, how can any one answer who knows, andsays that he knows, just nothing; and who, even if he has some faintnotions of his own, is told by a man of authority not to utter them?The natural thing is, that the speaker should be some one likeyourself who professes to know and can tell what he knows. Will youthen kindly answer, for the edification of the company and of myself ?
Glaucon and the rest of the company joined in my request andThrasymachus, as any one might see, was in reality eager to speak; forhe thought that he had an excellent answer, and would distinguishhimself. But at first he to insist on my answering; at length heconsented to begin. Behold, he said, the wisdom of Socrates; herefuses to teach himself, and goes about learning of others, to whomhe never even says thank you.
That I learn of others, I replied, is quite true; but that I amungrateful I wholly deny. Money I have none, and therefore I pay inpraise, which is all I have: and how ready I am to praise any onewho appears to me to speak well you will very soon find out when youanswer; for I expect that you will answer well.
Listen, then, he said; I proclaim that justice is nothing elsethan the interest of the stronger. And now why do you not me? But ofcourse you won't.
Let me first understand you, I replied. justice, as you say, isthe interest of the stronger. What, Thrasymachus, is the meaning ofthis? You cannot mean to say that because Polydamas, thepancratiast, is stronger than we are, and finds the eating of beefconducive to his bodily strength, that to eat beef is thereforeequally for our good who are weaker than he is, and right and just forus?
That's abominable of you, Socrates; you take the words in thesense which is most damaging to the argument.
Not at all, my good sir, I said; I am trying to understand them; andI wish that you would be a little clearer.
Well, he said, have you never heard that forms of government differ;there are tyrannies, and there are democracies, and there arearistocracies?
Yes, I know.
And the government is the ruling power in each state?
Certainly.
And the different forms of government make laws democratical,aristocratical, tyrannical, with a view to their several interests;and these laws, which are made by them for their own interests, arethe justice which they deliver to their subjects, and him whotransgresses them they punish as a breaker of the law, and unjust. Andthat is what I mean when I say that in all states there is the sameprinciple of justice, which is the interest of the government; andas the government must be supposed to have power, the onlyreasonable conclusion is, that everywhere there is one principle ofjustice, which is the interest of the stronger.
Now I understand you, I said; and whether you are right or not Iwill try to discover. But let me remark, that in defining justiceyou have yourself used the word 'interest' which you forbade me touse. It is true, however, that in your definition the words 'of thestronger' are added.
A small addition, you must allow, he said.
Great or small, never mind about that: we must first enquire whetherwhat you are saying is the truth. Now we are both agreed thatjustice is interest of some sort, but you go on to say 'of thestronger'; about this addition I am not so sure, and must thereforeconsider further.
Proceed.
I will; and first tell me, Do you admit that it is just orsubjects to obey their rulers?
I do.
But are the rulers of states absolutely infallible, or are theysometimes liable to err?
To be sure, he replied, they are liable to err.
Then in making their laws they may sometimes make them rightly,and sometimes not?
True.
When they make them rightly, they make them agreeably to theirinterest; when they are mistaken, contrary to their interest; youadmit that?
Yes.
And the laws which they make must be obeyed by their subjects, --andthat is what you call justice?
Doubtless.
Then justice, according to your argument, is not only obedience tothe interest of the stronger but the reverse?
What is that you are saying? he asked.
I am only repeating what you are saying, I believe. But let usconsider: Have we not admitted that the rulers may be mistaken abouttheir own interest in what they command, and also that to obey them isjustice? Has not that been admitted?
Yes.
Then you must also have acknowledged justice not to be for theinterest of the stronger, when the rulers unintentionally commandthings to be done which are to their own injury. For if, as you say,justice is the obedience which the subject renders to theircommands, in that case, O wisest of men, is there any escape fromthe conclusion that the weaker are commanded to do, not what is forthe interest, but what is for the injury of the stronger?
Nothing can be clearer, Socrates, said Polemarchus.
SOCRATES - CLEITOPHON - POLEMARCHUS - THRASYMACHUS
Yes, said Cleitophon, interposing, if you are allowed to be hiswitness.
But there is no need of any witness, said Polemarchus, forThrasymachus himself acknowledges that rulers may sometimes commandwhat is not for their own interest, and that for subjects to obey themis justice.
Yes, Polemarchus, --Thrasymachus said that for subjects to do whatwas commanded by their rulers is just.
Yes, Cleitophon, but he also said that justice is the interest ofthe stronger, and, while admitting both these propositions, he furtheracknowledged that the stronger may command the weaker who are hissubjects to do what is not for his own interest; whence follows thatjustice is the injury quite as much as the interest of the stronger.
But, said Cleitophon, he meant by the interest of the strongerwhat the stronger thought to be his interest, --this was what theweaker had to do; and this was affirmed by him to be justice.
Those were not his words, rejoined Polemarchus.
SOCRATES - THRASYMACHUS
Never mind, I replied, if he now says that they are, let us accepthis statement. Tell me, Thrasymachus, I said, did you mean byjustice what the stronger thought to be his interest, whether reallyso or not?
Certainly not, he said. Do you suppose that I call him who ismistaken the stronger at the time when he is mistaken?
Yes, I said, my impression was that you did so, when you admittedthat the ruler was not infallible but might be sometimes mistaken.
You argue like an informer, Socrates. Do you mean, for example, thathe who is mistaken about the sick is a physician in that he ismistaken? or that he who errs in arithmetic or grammar is anarithmetician or grammarian at the me when he is making the mistake,in respect of the mistake? True, we say that the physician orarithmetician or grammarian has made a mistake, but this is only a wayof speaking; for the fact is that neither the grammarian nor any otherperson of skill ever makes a mistake in so far as he is what hisname implies; they none of them err unless their skill fails them, andthen they cease to be skilled artists. No artist or sage or ruler errsat the time when he is what his name implies; though he is commonlysaid to err, and I adopted the common mode of speaking. But to beperfectly accurate, since you are such a lover of accuracy, weshould say that the ruler, in so far as he is the ruler, isunerring, and, being unerring, always commands that which is for hisown interest; and the subject is required to execute his commands; andtherefore, as I said at first and now repeat, justice is theinterest of the stronger.
Indeed, Thrasymachus, and do I really appear to you to argue like aninformer?
Certainly, he replied.
And you suppose that I ask these questions with any design ofinjuring you in the argument?
Nay, he replied, 'suppose' is not the word --I know it; but you willbe found out, and by sheer force of argument you will never prevail.
I shall not make the attempt, my dear man; but to avoid anymisunderstanding occurring between us in future, let me ask, in whatsense do you speak of a ruler or stronger whose interest, as youwere saying, he being the superior, it is just that the inferiorshould execute --is he a ruler in the popular or in the strict senseof the term?
In the strictest of all senses, he said. And now cheat and playthe informer if you can; I ask no quarter at your hands. But you neverwill be able, never.
And do you imagine, I said, that I am such a madman as to try andcheat, Thrasymachus? I might as well shave a lion.
Why, he said, you made the attempt a minute ago, and you failed.
Enough, I said, of these civilities. It will be better that I shouldask you a question: Is the physician, taken in that strict sense ofwhich you are speaking, a healer of the sick or a maker of money?And remember that I am now speaking of the true physician.
A healer of the sick, he replied.
And the pilot --that is to say, the true pilot --is he a captainof sailors or a mere sailor?
A captain of sailors.
The circumstance that he sails in the ship is not to be taken intoaccount; neither is he to be called a sailor; the name pilot bywhich he is distinguished has nothing to do with sailing, but issignificant of his skill and of his authority over the sailors.
Very true, he said.
Now, I said, every art has an interest?
Certainly.
For which the art has to consider and provide?
Yes, that is the aim of art.
And the interest of any art is the perfection of it --this andnothing else?
What do you mean?
I mean what I may illustrate negatively by the example of thebody. Suppose you were to ask me whether the body is self-sufficing orhas wants, I should reply: Certainly the body has wants; for thebody may be ill and require to be cured, and has therefore intereststo which the art of medicine ministers; and this is the origin andintention of medicine, as you will acknowledge. Am I not right?
Quite right, he replied.
But is the art of medicine or any other art faulty or deficient inany quality in the same way that the eye may be deficient in sightor the ear fail of hearing, and therefore requires another art toprovide for the interests of seeing and hearing --has art in itself, Isay, any similar liability to fault or defect, and does every artrequire another supplementary art to provide for its interests, andthat another and another without end? Or have the arts to look onlyafter their own interests? Or have they no need either of themselvesor of another? --having no faults or defects, they have no need tocorrect them, either by the exercise of their own art or of any other;they have only to consider the interest of their subject-matter. Forevery art remains pure and faultless while remaining true --that is tosay, while perfect and unimpaired. Take the words in your precisesense, and tell me whether I am not right."
Yes, clearly.
Then medicine does not consider the interest of medicine, but theinterest of the body?
True, he said.
Nor does the art of horsemanship consider the interests of the artof horsemanship, but the interests of the horse; neither do anyother arts care for themselves, for they have no needs; they care onlyfor that which is the subject of their art?
True, he said.
But surely, Thrasymachus, the arts are the superiors and rulers oftheir own subjects?
To this he assented with a good deal of reluctance.
Then, I said, no science or art considers or enjoins the interest ofthe stronger or superior, but only the interest of the subject andweaker?
He made an attempt to contest this proposition also, but finallyacquiesced.
Then, I continued, no physician, in so far as he is a physician,considers his own good in what he prescribes, but the good of hispatient; for the true physician is also a ruler having the humanbody as a subject, and is not a mere money-maker; that has beenadmitted?
Yes.
And the pilot likewise, in the strict sense of the term, is aruler of sailors and not a mere sailor?
That has been admitted.
And such a pilot and ruler will provide and prescribe for theinterest of the sailor who is under him, and not for his own or theruler's interest?
He gave a reluctant 'Yes.'
Then, I said, Thrasymachus, there is no one in any rule who, in sofar as he is a ruler, considers or enjoins what is for his owninterest, but always what is for the interest of his subject orsuitable to his art; to that he looks, and that alone he considersin everything which he says and does.
When we had got to this point in the argument, and every one sawthat the definition of justice had been completely upset,Thrasymachus, instead of replying to me, said: Tell me, Socrates, haveyou got a nurse?
Why do you ask such a question, I said, when you ought rather tobe answering?
Because she leaves you to snivel, and never wipes your nose: she hasnot even taught you to know the shepherd from the sheep.
What makes you say that? I replied.
Because you fancy that the shepherd or neatherd fattens of tends thesheep or oxen with a view to their own good and not to the good ofhimself or his master; and you further imagine that the rulers ofstates, if they are true rulers, never think of their subjects assheep, and that they are not studying their own advantage day andnight. Oh, no; and so entirely astray are you in your ideas aboutthe just and unjust as not even to know that justice and the justare in reality another's good; that is to say, the interest of theruler and stronger, and the loss of the subject and servant; andinjustice the opposite; for the unjust is lord over the truly simpleand just: he is the stronger, and his subjects do what is for hisinterest, and minister to his happiness, which is very far frombeing their own. Consider further, most foolish Socrates, that thejust is always a loser in comparison with the unjust. First of all, inprivate contracts: wherever the unjust is the partner of the justyou will find that, when the partnership is dissolved, the unjustman has always more and the just less. Secondly, in their dealingswith the State: when there is an income tax, the just man will paymore and the unjust less on the same amount of income; and whenthere is anything to be received the one gains nothing and the othermuch. Observe also what happens when they take an office; there is thejust man neglecting his affairs and perhaps suffering other losses,and getting nothing out of the public, because he is just; moreover heis hated by his friends and acquaintance for refusing to serve them inunlawful ways. But all this is reversed in the case of the unjust man.I am speaking, as before, of injustice on a large scale in which theadvantage of the unjust is more apparent; and my meaning will bemost clearly seen if we turn to that highest form of injustice inwhich the criminal is the happiest of men, and the sufferers orthose who refuse to do injustice are the most miserable --that is tosay tyranny, which by fraud and force takes away the property ofothers, not little by little but wholesale; comprehending in one,things sacred as well as profane, private and public; for which actsof wrong, if he were detected perpetrating any one of them singly,he would be punished and incur great disgrace --they who do such wrongin particular cases are called robbers of temples, and man-stealersand burglars and swindlers and thieves. But when a man besidestaking away the money of the citizens has made slaves of them, then,instead of these names of reproach, he is termed happy and blessed,not only by the citizens but by all who hear of his having achievedthe consummation of injustice. For mankind censure injustice,fearing that they may be the victims of it and not because they shrinkfrom committing it. And thus, as I have shown, Socrates, injustice,when on a sufficient scale, has more strength and freedom andmastery than justice; and, as I said at first, justice is the interestof the stronger, whereas injustice is a man's own profit and interest.
Thrasymachus, when he had thus spoken, having, like a bathman,deluged our ears with his words, had a mind to go away. But thecompany would not let him; they insisted that he should remain anddefend his position; and I myself added my own humble request thathe would not leave us. Thrasymachus, I said to him, excellent man, howsuggestive are your remarks! And are you going to run away beforeyou have fairly taught or learned whether they are true or not? Is theattempt to determine the way of man's life so small a matter in youreyes --to determine how life may be passed by each one of us to thegreatest advantage?
And do I differ from you, he said, as to the importance of theenquiry?
You appear rather, I replied, to have no care or thought about us,Thrasymachus --whether we live better or worse from not knowing whatyou say you know, is to you a matter of indifference. Prithee, friend,do not keep your knowledge to yourself; we are a large party; andany benefit which you confer upon us will be amply rewarded. For myown part I openly declare that I am not convinced, and that I do notbelieve injustice to be more gainful than justice, even ifuncontrolled and allowed to have free play. For, granting that theremay be an unjust man who is able to commit injustice either by fraudor force, still this does not convince me of the superior advantage ofinjustice, and there may be others who are in the same predicamentwith myself. Perhaps we may be wrong; if so, you in your wisdom shouldconvince us that we are mistaken in preferring justice to injustice.
And how am I to convince you, he said, if you are not alreadyconvinced by what I have just said; what more can I do for you?Would you have me put the proof bodily into your souls?
Heaven forbid! I said; I would only ask you to be consistent; or, ifyou change, change openly and let there be no deception. For I mustremark, Thrasymachus, if you will recall what was previously said,that although you began by defining the true physician in an exactsense, you did not observe a like exactness when speaking of theshepherd; you thought that the shepherd as a shepherd tends thesheep not with a view to their own good, but like a mere diner orbanqueter with a view to the pleasures of the table; or, again, as atrader for sale in the market, and not as a shepherd. Yet surely theart of the shepherd is concerned only with the good of his subjects;he has only to provide the best for them, since the perfection ofthe art is already ensured whenever all the requirements of it aresatisfied. And that was what I was saying just now about the ruler.I conceived that the art of the ruler, considered as ruler, whether ina state or in private life, could only regard the good of his flock orsubjects; whereas you seem to think that the rulers in states, that isto say, the true rulers, like being in authority.
Think! Nay, I am sure of it.
Then why in the case of lesser offices do men never take themwillingly without payment, unless under the idea that they governfor the advantage not of themselves but of others? Let me ask you aquestion: Are not the several arts different, by reason of theireach having a separate function? And, my dear illustrious friend, dosay what you think, that we may make a little progress.
Yes, that is the difference, he replied.
And each art gives us a particular good and not merely a general one--medicine, for example, gives us health; navigation, safety at sea,and so on?
Yes, he said.
And the art of payment has the special function of giving pay: butwe do not confuse this with other arts, any more than the art of thepilot is to be confused with the art of medicine, because the healthof the pilot may be improved by a sea voyage. You would not beinclined to say, would you, that navigation is the art of medicine, atleast if we are to adopt your exact use of language?
Certainly not.
Or because a man is in good health when he receives pay you wouldnot say that the art of payment is medicine?
I should say not.
Nor would you say that medicine is the art of receiving paybecause a man takes fees when he is engaged in healing?
Certainly not.
And we have admitted, I said, that the good of each art is speciallyconfined to the art?
Yes.
Then, if there be any good which all artists have in common, that isto be attributed to something of which they all have the common use?
True, he replied.
And when the artist is benefited by receiving pay the advantage isgained by an additional use of the art of pay, which is not the artprofessed by him?
He gave a reluctant assent to this.
Then the pay is not derived by the several artists from theirrespective arts. But the truth is, that while the art of medicinegives health, and the art of the builder builds a house, another artattends them which is the art of pay. The various arts may be doingtheir own business and benefiting that over which they preside, butwould the artist receive any benefit from his art unless he werepaid as well?
I suppose not.
But does he therefore confer no benefit when he works for nothing?
Certainly, he confers a benefit.
Then now, Thrasymachus, there is no longer any doubt that neitherarts nor governments provide for their own interests; but, as wewere before saying, they rule and provide for the interests of theirsubjects who are the weaker and not the stronger --to their goodthey attend and not to the good of the superior.
And this is the reason, my dear Thrasymachus, why, as I was just nowsaying, no one is willing to govern; because no one likes to take inhand the reformation of evils which are not his concern withoutremuneration. For, in the execution of his work, and in giving hisorders to another, the true artist does not regard his own interest,but always that of his subjects; and therefore in order that rulersmay be willing to rule, they must be paid in one of three modes ofpayment: money, or honour, or a penalty for refusing.
SOCRATES - GLAUCON
What do you mean, Socrates? said Glaucon. The first two modes ofpayment are intelligible enough, but what the penalty is I do notunderstand, or how a penalty can be a payment.
You mean that you do not understand the nature of this payment whichto the best men is the great inducement to rule? Of course you knowthat ambition and avarice are held to be, as indeed they are, adisgrace?
Very true.
And for this reason, I said, money and honour have no attraction forthem; good men do not wish to be openly demanding payment forgoverning and so to get the name of hirelings, nor by secretly helpingthemselves out of the public revenues to get the name of thieves.And not being ambitious they do not care about honour. Whereforenecessity must be laid upon them, and they must be induced to servefrom the fear of punishment. And this, as I imagine, is the reason whythe forwardness to take office, instead of waiting to be compelled,has been deemed dishonourable. Now the worst part of the punishment isthat he who refuses to rule is liable to be ruled by one who isworse than himself. And the fear of this, as I conceive, induces thegood to take office, not because they would, but because they cannothelp --not under the idea that they are going to have any benefit orenjoyment themselves, but as a necessity, and because they are notable to commit the task of ruling to any one who is better thanthemselves, or indeed as good. For there is reason to think that ifa city were composed entirely of good men, then to avoid officewould be as much an object of contention as to obtain office is atpresent; then we should have plain proof that the true ruler is notmeant by nature to regard his own interest, but that of hissubjects; and every one who knew this would choose rather to receive abenefit from another than to have the trouble of conferring one. Sofar am I from agreeing with Thrasymachus that justice is theinterest of the stronger. This latter question need not be furtherdiscussed at present; but when Thrasymachus says that the life ofthe unjust is more advantageous than that of the just, his newstatement appears to me to be of a far more serious character. Whichof us has spoken truly? And which sort of life, Glaucon, do youprefer?
I for my part deem the life of the just to be the more advantageous,he answered.
Did you hear all the advantages of the unjust which Thrasymachus wasrehearsing?
Yes, I heard him, he replied, but he has not convinced me.
Then shall we try to find some way of convincing him, if we can,that he is saying what is not true?
Most certainly, he replied.
If, I said, he makes a set speech and we make another recounting allthe advantages of being just, and he answers and we rejoin, there mustbe a numbering and measuring of the goods which are claimed oneither side, and in the end we shall want judges to decide; but ifwe proceed in our enquiry as we lately did, by making admissions toone another, we shall unite the offices of judge and advocate in ourown persons.
Very good, he said.
And which method do I understand you to prefer? I said.
That which you propose.
Well, then, Thrasymachus, I said, suppose you begin at the beginningand answer me. You say that perfect injustice is more gainful thanperfect justice?
SOCRATES - GLAUCON - THRASYMACHUS
Yes, that is what I say, and I have given you my reasons.
And what is your view about them? Would you call one of themvirtue and the other vice?
Certainly.
I suppose that you would call justice virtue and injustice vice?
What a charming notion! So likely too, seeing that I affirminjustice to be profitable and justice not.
What else then would you say?
The opposite, he replied.
And would you call justice vice?
No, I would rather say sublime simplicity.
Then would you call injustice malignity?
No; I would rather say discretion.
And do the unjust appear to you to be wise and good?
Yes, he said; at any rate those of them who are able to be perfectlyunjust, and who have the power of subduing states and nations; butperhaps you imagine me to be talking of cutpurses.
Even this profession if undetected has advantages, though they arenot to be compared with those of which I was just now speaking.
I do not think that I misapprehend your meaning, Thrasymachus, Ireplied; but still I cannot hear without amazement that you classinjustice with wisdom and virtue, and justice with the opposite.
Certainly I do so class them.
Now, I said, you are on more substantial and almost unanswerableground; for if the injustice which you were maintaining to beprofitable had been admitted by you as by others to be vice anddeformity, an answer might have been given to you on receivedprinciples; but now I perceive that you will call injustice honourableand strong, and to the unjust you will attribute all the qualitieswhich were attributed by us before to the just, seeing that you do nothesitate to rank injustice with wisdom and virtue.
You have guessed most infallibly, he replied.
Then I certainly ought not to shrink from going through with theargument so long as I have reason to think that you, Thrasymachus, arespeaking your real mind; for I do believe that you are now inearnest and are not amusing yourself at our expense.
I may be in earnest or not, but what is that to you? --to refute theargument is your business.
Very true, I said; that is what I have to do: But will you be sogood as answer yet one more question? Does the just man try to gainany advantage over the just?
Far otherwise; if he did would not be the simple, amusing creaturewhich he is.
And would he try to go beyond just action?
He would not.
And how would he regard the attempt to gain an advantage over theunjust; would that be considered by him as just or unjust?
He would think it just, and would try to gain the advantage; buthe would not be able.
Whether he would or would not be able, I said, is not to thepoint. My question is only whether the just man, while refusing tohave more than another just man, would wish and claim to have morethan the unjust?
Yes, he would.
And what of the unjust --does he claim to have more than the justman and to do more than is just
Of course, he said, for he claims to have more than all men.
And the unjust man will strive and struggle to obtain more thanthe unjust man or action, in order that he may have more than all?
True.
We may put the matter thus, I said --the just does not desire morethan his like but more than his unlike, whereas the unjust desiresmore than both his like and his unlike?
Nothing, he said, can be better than that statement.
And the unjust is good and wise, and the just is neither?
Good again, he said.
And is not the unjust like the wise and good and the just unlikethem?
Of course, he said, he who is of a certain nature, is like those whoare of a certain nature; he who is not, not.
Each of them, I said, is such as his like is?
Certainly, he replied.
Very good, Thrasymachus, I said; and now to take the case of thearts: you would admit that one man is a musician and another not amusician?
Yes.
And which is wise and which is foolish?
Clearly the musician is wise, and he who is not a musician isfoolish.
And he is good in as far as he is wise, and bad in as far as he isfoolish?
Yes.
And you would say the same sort of thing of the physician?
Yes.
And do you think, my excellent friend, that a musician when headjusts the lyre would desire or claim to exceed or go beyond amusician in the tightening and loosening the strings?
I do not think that he would.
But he would claim to exceed the non-musician?
Of course.
And what would you say of the physician? In prescribing meats anddrinks would he wish to go beyond another physician or beyond thepractice of medicine?
He would not.
But he would wish to go beyond the non-physician?
Yes.
And about knowledge and ignorance in general; see whether youthink that any man who has knowledge ever would wish to have thechoice of saying or doing more than another man who has knowledge.Would he not rather say or do the same as his like in the same case?
That, I suppose, can hardly be denied.
And what of the ignorant? would he not desire to have more thaneither the knowing or the ignorant?
I dare say.
And the knowing is wise?
Yes.
And the wise is good?
True.
Then the wise and good will not desire to gain more than his like,but more than his unlike and opposite?
I suppose so.
Whereas the bad and ignorant will desire to gain more than both?
Yes.
But did we not say, Thrasymachus, that the unjust goes beyond bothhis like and unlike? Were not these your words? They were.
They were.
And you also said that the lust will not go beyond his like buthis unlike?
Yes.
Then the just is like the wise and good, and the unjust like theevil and ignorant?
That is the inference.
And each of them is such as his like is?
That was admitted.
Then the just has turned out to be wise and good and the unjust eviland ignorant.
Thrasymachus made all these admissions, not fluently, as I repeatthem, but with extreme reluctance; it was a hot summer's day, andthe perspiration poured from him in torrents; and then I saw what Ihad never seen before, Thrasymachus blushing. As we were now agreedthat justice was virtue and wisdom, and injustice vice andignorance, I proceeded to another point:
Well, I said, Thrasymachus, that matter is now settled; but werewe not also saying that injustice had strength; do you remember?
Yes, I remember, he said, but do not suppose that I approve ofwhat you are saying or have no answer; if however I were to answer,you would be quite certain to accuse me of haranguing; thereforeeither permit me to have my say out, or if you would rather ask, doso, and I will answer 'Very good,' as they say to story-telling oldwomen, and will nod 'Yes' and 'No.'
Certainly not, I said, if contrary to your real opinion.
Yes, he said, I will, to please you, since you will not let mespeak. What else would you have?
Nothing in the world, I said; and if you are so disposed I willask and you shall answer.
Proceed.
Then I will repeat the question which I asked before, in orderthat our examination of the relative nature of justice and injusticemay be carried on regularly. A statement was made that injustice isstronger and more powerful than justice, but now justice, havingbeen identified with wisdom and virtue, is easily shown to be strongerthan injustice, if injustice is ignorance; this can no longer bequestioned by any one. But I want to view the matter, Thrasymachus, ina different way: You would not deny that a state may be unjust and maybe unjustly attempting to enslave other states, or may have alreadyenslaved them, and may be holding many of them in subjection?
True, he replied; and I will add the best and perfectly unjust statewill be most likely to do so.
I know, I said, that such was your position; but what I wouldfurther consider is, whether this power which is possessed by thesuperior state can exist or be exercised without justice.
If you are right in you view, and justice is wisdom, then onlywith justice; but if I am right, then without justice.
I am delighted, Thrasymachus, to see you not only nodding assent anddissent, but making answers which are quite excellent.
That is out of civility to you, he replied.
You are very kind, I said; and would you have the goodness also toinform me, whether you think that a state, or an army, or a band ofrobbers and thieves, or any other gang of evil-doers could act atall if they injured one another?
No indeed, he said, they could not.
But if they abstained from injuring one another, then they might acttogether better?
Yes.
And this is because injustice creates divisions and hatreds andfighting, and justice imparts harmony and friendship; is not thattrue, Thrasymachus?
I agree, he said, because I do not wish to quarrel with you.
How good of you, I said; but I should like to know also whetherinjustice, having this tendency to arouse hatred, wherever existing,among slaves or among freemen, will not make them hate one another andset them at variance and render them incapable of common action?
Certainly.
And even if injustice be found in two only, will they not quarreland fight, and become enemies to one another and to the just
They will.
And suppose injustice abiding in a single person, would yourwisdom say that she loses or that she retains her natural power?
Let us assume that she retains her power.
Yet is not the power which injustice exercises of such a nature thatwherever she takes up her abode, whether in a city, in an army, in afamily, or in any other body, that body is, to begin with, renderedincapable of united action by reason of sedition and distraction;and does it not become its own enemy and at variance with all thatopposes it, and with the just? Is not this the case?
Yes, certainly.
And is not injustice equally fatal when existing in a single person;in the first place rendering him incapable of action because he is notat unity with himself, and in the second place making him an enemyto himself and the just? Is not that true, Thrasymachus?
Yes.
And O my friend, I said, surely the gods are just?
Granted that they are.
But if so, the unjust will be the enemy of the gods, and the justwill be their friend?
Feast away in triumph, and take your fill of the argument; I willnot oppose you, lest I should displease the company.
Well then, proceed with your answers, and let me have theremainder of my repast. For we have already shown that the just areclearly wiser and better and abler than the unjust, and that theunjust are incapable of common action; nay ing at more, that tospeak as we did of men who are evil acting at any time vigorouslytogether, is not strictly true, for if they had been perfectly evil,they would have laid hands upon one another; but it is evident thatthere must have been some remnant of justice in them, which enabledthem to combine; if there had not been they would have injured oneanother as well as their victims; they were but half --villains intheir enterprises; for had they been whole villains, and utterlyunjust, they would have been utterly incapable of action. That, as Ibelieve, is the truth of the matter, and not what you said at first.But whether the just have a better and happier life than the unjust isa further question which we also proposed to consider. I think thatthey have, and for the reasons which to have given; but still I shouldlike to examine further, for no light matter is at stake, nothing lessthan the rule of human life.
Proceed.
I will proceed by asking a question: Would you not say that ahorse has some end?
I should.
And the end or use of a horse or of anything would be that whichcould not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished, by any otherthing?
I do not understand, he said.
Let me explain: Can you see, except with the eye?
Certainly not.
Or hear, except with the ear?
No.
These then may be truly said to be the ends of these organs?
They may.
But you can cut off a vine-branch with a dagger or with a chisel,and in many other ways?
Of course.
And yet not so well as with a pruning-hook made for the purpose?
True.
May we not say that this is the end of a pruning-hook?
We may.
Then now I think you will have no difficulty in understanding mymeaning when I asked the question whether the end of anything would bethat which could not be accomplished, or not so well accomplished,by any other thing?
I understand your meaning, he said, and assent.
And that to which an end is appointed has also an excellence? Need Iask again whether the eye has an end?
It has.
And has not the eye an excellence?
Yes.
And the ear has an end and an excellence also?
True.
And the same is true of all other things; they have each of theman end and a special excellence?
That is so.
Well, and can the eyes fulfil their end if they are wanting in theirown proper excellence and have a defect instead?
How can they, he said, if they are blind and cannot see?
You mean to say, if they have lost their proper excellence, which issight; but I have not arrived at that point yet. I would rather askthe question more generally, and only enquire whether the things whichfulfil their ends fulfil them by their own proper excellence, and fallof fulfilling them by their own defect?
Certainly, he replied.
I might say the same of the ears; when deprived of their ownproper excellence they cannot fulfil their end?
True.
And the same observation will apply to all other things?
I agree.
Well; and has not the soul an end which nothing else can fulfil? forexample, to superintend and command and deliberate and the like. Arenot these functions proper to the soul, and can they rightly beassigned to any other?
To no other.
And is not life to be reckoned among the ends of the soul?
Assuredly, he said.
And has not the soul an excellence also?
Yes.
And can she or can she not fulfil her own ends when deprived of thatexcellence?
She cannot.
Then an evil soul must necessarily be an evil ruler andsuperintendent, and the good soul a good ruler?
Yes, necessarily.
And we have admitted that justice is the excellence of the soul, andinjustice the defect of the soul?
That has been admitted.
Then the just soul and the just man will live well, and the unjustman will live ill?
That is what your argument proves.
And he who lives well is blessed and happy, and he who lives ill thereverse of happy?
Certainly.
Then the just is happy, and the unjust miserable?
So be it.
But happiness and not misery is profitable.
Of course.
Then, my blessed Thrasymachus, injustice can never be moreprofitable than justice.
Let this, Socrates, he said, be your entertainment at the Bendidea.
For which I am indebted to you, I said, now that you have growngentle towards me and have left off scolding. Nevertheless, I have notbeen well entertained; but that was my own fault and not yours. Asan epicure snatches a taste of every dish which is successivelybrought to table, he not having allowed himself time to enjoy theone before, so have I gone from one subject to another withouthaving discovered what I sought at first, the nature of justice. Ileft that enquiry and turned away to consider whether justice isvirtue and wisdom or evil and folly; and when there arose a furtherquestion about the comparative advantages of justice and injustice,I could not refrain from passing on to that. And the result of thewhole discussion has been that I know nothing at all. For I know notwhat justice is, and therefore I am not likely to know whether it isor is not a virtue, nor can I say whether the just man is happy or unhappy.
 

LastIndexNext

 