


 
BOOK ONE: 1805
CHAPTER III 

　　Anna Pavlovna's reception was in full swing. The spindles hummedsteadily and ceaselessly on all sides. With the exception of the aunt,beside whom sat only one elderly lady, who with her thin careworn facewas rather out of place in this brilliant society, the whole companyhad settled into three groups. One, chiefly masculine, had formedround the abbe. Another, of young people, was grouped round thebeautiful Princess Helene, Prince Vasili's daughter, and the littlePrincess Bolkonskaya, very pretty and rosy, though rather too plumpfor her age. The third group was gathered round Mortemart and AnnaPavlovna. 
　　The vicomte was a nice-looking young man with soft features andpolished manners, who evidently considered himself a celebrity but outof politeness modestly placed himself at the disposal of the circle inwhich he found himself. Anna Pavlovna was obviously serving him upas a treat to her guests. As a clever maitre d'hotel serves up as aspecially choice delicacy a piece of meat that no one who had seenit in the kitchen would have cared to eat, so Anna Pavlovna servedup to her guests, first the vicomte and then the abbe, as peculiarlychoice morsels. The group about Mortemart immediately began discussingthe murder of the Duc d'Enghien. The vicomte said that the Ducd'Enghien had perished by his own magnanimity, and that there wereparticular reasons for Buonaparte's hatred of him.
　　"Ah, yes! Do tell us all about it, Vicomte," said Anna Pavlovna,with a pleasant feeling that there was something a la Louis XV inthe sound of that sentence: "Contez nous cela, Vicomte."
　　The vicomte bowed and smiled courteously in token of his willingnessto comply. Anna Pavlovna arranged a group round him, inviting everyoneto listen to his tale.
　　"The vicomte knew the duc personally," whispered Anna Pavlovna to ofthe guests. "The vicomte is a wonderful raconteur," said she toanother. "How evidently he belongs to the best society," said she to athird; and the vicomte was served up to the company in the choicestand most advantageous style, like a well-garnished joint of roast beefon a hot dish.
　　The vicomte wished to begin his story and gave a subtle smile.
　　"Come over here, Helene, dear," said Anna Pavlovna to thebeautiful young princess who was sitting some way off, the center ofanother group.
　　The princess smiled. She rose with the same unchanging smile withwhich she had first entered the room- the smile of a perfectlybeautiful woman. With a slight rustle of her white dress trimmedwith moss and ivy, with a gleam of white shoulders, glossy hair, andsparkling diamonds, she passed between the men who made way for her,not looking at any of them but smiling on all, as if graciouslyallowing each the privilege of admiring her beautiful figure andshapely shoulders, back, and bosom- which in the fashion of those dayswere very much exposed- and she seemed to bring the glamour of aballroom with her as she moved toward Anna Pavlovna. Helene was solovely that not only did she not show any trace of coquetry, but onthe contrary she even appeared shy of her unquestionable and all toovictorious beauty. She seemed to wish, but to be unable, to diminishits effect.
　　"How lovely!" said everyone who saw her; and the vicomte liftedhis shoulders and dropped his eyes as if startled by somethingextraordinary when she took her seat opposite and beamed upon him alsowith her unchanging smile.
　　"Madame, I doubt my ability before such an audience," said he,smilingly inclining his head.
　　The princess rested her bare round arm on a little table andconsidered a reply unnecessary. She smilingly waited. All the time thestory was being told she sat upright, glancing now at her beautifulround arm, altered in shape by its pressure on the table, now at herstill more beautiful bosom, on which she readjusted a diamondnecklace. From time to time she smoothed the folds of her dress, andwhenever the story produced an effect she glanced at Anna Pavlovna, atonce adopted just the expression she saw on the maid of honor'sface, and again relapsed into her radiant smile.
　　The little princess had also left the tea table and followed Helene.
　　"Wait a moment, I'll get my work.... Now then, what are you thinkingof?" she went on, turning to Prince Hippolyte. "Fetch me my workbag."
　　There was a general movement as the princess, smiling and talkingmerrily to everyone at once, sat down and gaily arranged herself inher seat.
　　"Now I am all right," she said, and asking the vicomte to begin, shetook up her work.
　　Prince Hippolyte, having brought the workbag, joined the circleand moving a chair close to hers seated himself beside her.
　　Le charmant Hippolyte was surprising by his extraordinaryresemblance to his beautiful sister, but yet more by the fact thatin spite of this resemblance he was exceedingly ugly. His featureswere like his sister's, but while in her case everything was lit up bya joyous, self-satisfied, youthful, and constant smile of animation,and by the wonderful classic beauty of her figure, his face on thecontrary was dulled by imbecility and a constant expression ofsullen self-confidence, while his body was thin and weak. His eyes,nose, and mouth all seemed puckered into a vacant, wearied grimace,and his arms and legs always fell into unnatural positions.
　　"It's not going to be a ghost story?" said he, sitting down besidethe princess and hastily adjusting his lorgnette, as if without thisinstrument he could not begin to speak.
　　"Why no, my dear fellow," said the astonished narrator, shrugginghis shoulders.
　　"Because I hate ghost stories," said Prince Hippolyte in a tonewhich showed that he only understood the meaning of his words after hehad uttered them.
　　He spoke with such self-confidence that his hearers could not besure whether what he said was very witty or very stupid. He wasdressed in a dark-green dress coat, knee breeches of the color ofcuisse de nymphe effrayee, as he called it, shoes, and silk stockings.
　　The vicomte told his tale very neatly. It was an anecdote, thencurrent, to the effect that the Duc d'Enghien had gone secretly toParis to visit Mademoiselle George; that at her house he came uponBonaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress' favors, and that inhis presence Napoleon happened to fall into one of the fainting fitsto which he was subject, and was thus at the duc's mercy. The latterspared him, and this magnanimity Bonaparte subsequently repaid bydeath.
　　The story was very pretty and interesting, especially at the pointwhere the rivals suddenly recognized one another; and the ladieslooked agitated.
　　"Charming!" said Anna Pavlovna with an inquiring glance at thelittle princess.
　　"Charming!" whispered the little princess, sticking the needleinto her work as if to testify that the interest and fascination ofthe story prevented her from going on with it.
　　The vicomte appreciated this silent praise and smiling gratefullyprepared to continue, but just then Anna Pavlovna, who had kept awatchful eye on the young man who so alarmed her, noticed that hewas talking too loudly and vehemently with the abbe, so she hurried tothe rescue. Pierre had managed to start a conversation with the abbeabout the balance of power, and the latter, evidently interested bythe young man's simple-minded eagerness, was explaining his pettheory. Both were talking and listening too eagerly and too naturally,which was why Anna Pavlovna disapproved.
　　"The means are... the balance of power in Europe and the rights ofthe people," the abbe was saying. "It is only necessary for onepowerful nation like Russia- barbaric as she is said to be- to placeherself disinterestedly at the head of an alliance having for itsobject the maintenance of the balance of power of Europe, and it wouldsave the world!"
　　"But how are you to get that balance?" Pierre was beginning.
　　At that moment Anna Pavlovna came up and, looking severely atPierre, asked the Italian how he stood Russian climate. TheItalian's face instantly changed and assumed an offensivelyaffected, sugary expression, evidently habitual to him when conversingwith women.
　　"I am so enchanted by the brilliancy of the wit and culture of thesociety, more especially of the feminine society, in which I havehad the honor of being received, that I have not yet had time to thinkof the climate," said he.
　　Not letting the abbe and Pierre escape, Anna Pavlovna, the moreconveniently to keep them under observation, brought them into thelarger circle.



LastIndexNext

? Leo Tolstoy

 
  