

 





  

VI

EXT. SKYSCRAPER
The agents lead a handcuffed Neo out of the revolving
doors, forcing his head down as they push him into the
dark sedan.
Trinity watches in the rear view mirror of her motorcycle.
TRINITY
Shit.
INT. INTERROGATION ROOM - CLOSE ON CAMERA MONITOR
A wide angle view of a white roon, where Neo is sitting at
a table alone.
We MOVE INTO the monitor, ENTERING the room as if the
monitor were a window.
At the same moment, the door opens and the agents enter.
Smith sits down across from Neo. A thick manila envelope
slaps down on the table between them.
Neo glances at the name on the file: "Anderson, Thomas
A."
AGENT SMITH
As you can see, we've had our eye on you for some time now, Mr.
Anderson.
He opens the file. Paper rattle marks the silence as he
flips several pages. Neo cannot tell if he is looking at
the file or at him.
AGENT SMITH
It seems that you have been living two lives. In one life, you are
Thomas A. Anderson, program writer for a respectable software
company. You have a social security number, you pay your
taxes and you help your land lady carry out her garbage.
The pages continue to turn.
AGENT SMITH
The other life is lived in computers where you go by the
hacker alias Neo, and are guilty of virtually every computer crime
we have a law for, including the unauthorized use of the D.M.V.
system for the removal of automobile boots.
Neo feels himself sinking into a pit of shit.
AGENT SMITH
One of these,lives has a future.
One of them does not.
He closes the file.
AGENT SMITH
I'm going to be as forthcoming as I can be, Mr. Anderson. You are
here because we need your help.
He removes his sunglasses; his eyes are an unnatural ice- blue.
AGENT SMITH
We know that you have been contacted by a certain individual.
A man who calls himself Morpheus. Whatever you think you know about this man is irrelevant to the fact that he is wanted for acts of
terrorism in more countries than any other man in the world. He is
considered by many authorities to be the most dangerous man alive.
He leans closer.
AGENT SMITH
My colleagues believe that I am wasting my time with you, but I
believe you want to do the right thing. It is obvious that you are
an intelligent man, Mr. Anderson, and that you are interested in the
future. That is why I believe you are ready to put your past
mistakes behind you and get on with your life.
Neo tries to match his stare.
AGENT SMITH
We are willing to wipe the slate clean, to give you a fresh start
and all we are asking in return is your cooperation in bringing a
known terrorist to justice.
Neo nods to himself.
NEO
Yeah. Wow. That sounds like a real good deal. But I think I
have a better one. How about I give you the finger --
He does.
NEO
And you can cram that file up your Secret Service sphincter.
Agent Smith puts his glasses back on.
AGENT SMITH
You disappoint me, Mr. Anderson.
NEO
You ain't seen nothing yet.
AGENT SMITH
The irony of your situation is that you have no choice.
NEO
You can't scare me with this gestapo crap. I know my rights.
I want my phone call.
Agent Smith smiles.
AGENT SMITH
And tell me, Mr. Anderson, what good is a phone call iy you are
unable to speak?
The question unnerves Neo and strangely, he begins to
feel the muscles in his jaw tighten.
The standing agents snicker, watching Neo's confusion
grow into panic.
Neo feels his lips grow soft and sticky as they slowly
seal shut, melding into each other until all trace of his
mouth is gone.
Wild with fear, he lunges for the door but the agents
restrain him holding him in the chair.
AGENT SMITH
You are going to help us, Mr. Anderson, whether you want to or
not.
Smith nods and the other two rip open his shirt.
From a case taken out of his suit coat, Smith removes a
long, fiber-optic wire tap.
Neo struggles helplessly as Smith dangles the wire over
his exposed abdomen. Horrified, he watches as the
electronic device animates, become an organic creature
that resembles a hybrid of an insect and a fluke worm.
Thin, whisker-like tendrils reach out and probe into
Neo's navel. He bucks wildly as Smith drops the creature
which looks for a moment like an uncut umbilical cord --
Before it begins to burrow its, tail thrashing as it
worms its way inside.

INT. NEO'S APARTMENT - NIGHT
Screaming, Neo bolts upright in bed.
He realizes that he is home. Was it a dream? His mouth
is normal. His stomach looks fine. He starts to take a
deep, everything-is-okay breath, when --
The PHONE RINGS.
It almost stops his heart. It CONTINUES RINGING,
building pressure in the room, forcing him up out of bed,
sucking him in with an almost gravitational force.
He answers it, saying nothing.
MORPHEUS (V.O.).
This line is tapped, so I must be brief.
NEO
The agents --
MORPHEUS (V.O.)
They got to you first, but they've underestimated how important you
are. If they knew what I know, you would probably be dead.
Neo feels sick.
MORPHEUS (V.O.)
I don't know what you are thinking right now but I want you to
understand that I will not give up on you until you give up on me.
Neo's throat cracks, dry as the Sahara.
MORPHEUS (V.O.)
Do you still want to meet?
NEO
... Yes.
MORPHEUS (V.O.)
Take the Howard line south.
CLICK. He closes his eyes, unsure of what he has done.
  
LastIndexNext

? Larry & Andy Wachowski




 
  