

 





  

IX

INT. POWER PLANT - CLOSE ON MAN'S BODY
Floating in a womb-red amnion.
His body spasms, fighting against the thick gelatin.
Metal tubes, surreal versions of hospital tubes, obscure
his face. Other lines like IVs are connected to limbs
and cover his genitals.
He is struggling desperately now. Air bubbles into the
Jell-O but does not break the surface.
Pressing up, the surface distends, stretching like a red
rubber coccon.
Unable to breathe, he fights wildly to stand, clawing at
the thinning elastic shroud --
Until it ruptures, a hole widening around his mouth as he
sucks for air. Tearing himself free, he emerges from the
cell.
It is Neo.
He is bald and naked, his body slick with gelatin.
Dizzy, nauseous, he waits for his vision to focus.
He is standing in an oval capsule of clear alloy filled
with red gelatin, the surface of which has solidified
like curdled milk.
The IVs in his arms are plugged into outlets that appear
to be grafted to his flesh.
He feels the weight of another cable and reaches to the
back of his head where he finds an enormous coaxial
plugged and locked into the base of his skull.
He tries to pull it out but it would be easier to pull
off a finger.
To either side he sees other tube-shaped pods filled with
red gelatin; beneath the wax-like surface, pale and
motionless, he sees other human beings.
Fanning out in a circle, there are more. All connected
to a center core, each capsule like a red, dimly glowing
petal attached to a black metal stem.
Above him, level after, level, the stem rises seemingly
forever. He moves to the foot of the capsule and looks
out.
The image assaults his mind.
Towers of glowing petals spiral up to incomprehensible
heights, disappearing down into a dim murk like an
underwater abyss.
His sight is blurred and warped, exaggerating the
intensity of the vision. The sound of the PLANT is like
the sound of the ocean heard from inside the belly of
Leviathan.
Below Neo, a petal detaches from the stem, bearing away
the body of an old man like an automated barge even as a
new pod rises up and plugs itself into the empty space.
Inside the new capsule, its surface more translucent and
pinkish in color, Neo sees a small baby.
From above, a machine drops directly in front of Neo.
He swallows his scream as it seems to stare at him.
It is almost insect-like in its design; beautiful
housings of alloyed metal covering organic-like systems
of hard and soft polymers.
A black particle beam washes over Neo, he reacts in pain
as the scanner seems to expose the nervous system wired
to the coaxial cable at his cerebral cortex.
At the back of the neck, the cable lock spins and opens,
disengaging.
The cable pulls itself free, a long clear plastic needle
and cerebrum-chip slides from the anterior of Neols skull
with an ooze of blood and spinal fluid. The other
connective hoses snap free and snake away as --
The back of the unit opens and a tremendous vacuum, like
an airplane door opening, sucks the gelatin and then Neo
into a black hole.

INT. WASTE LINE
The pipe is a waste disposal system and Neo falls,
sliding with the clot of gelatin.
Banking through pipe spirals and elbows, flushing up
through grease traps clogged with cily clunps of
cellulite.
Neo begins to drown when he is suddenly snatched from the
flow of waste.
The metallic cable then lifts, pulling him up into the
belly of the futuristic flying nachine, hovering inside
the sewer main line.

INT. HOVERCRAFT
The metal harness opens and drops the half-conscious Neo
onto the floor.
Human hands and arms help him up as he finds himself
looking straight at Morpheus.
Trinity and Apoc. And others, dressed in bizarre, high-
tech combat gear.
Morpheus smiles.
MORPHEUS
Welcome to the real world, Neo.
Neo passes out.
FADE TO BLACK.
We have no sense of time. We hear VOICES whispering.
MAN (O.S.)
Do you think Morpheus is right?
Do you think he could be the One?
WOMAN (O.S.)
It doesn't matter now. But if he's wrong...
FADE IN:
NEO'S POV
Neo's eyes flutter open. We see Trinity's face above us,
angelic in the fluorescent glow of a light stick.

ANGLE ON NEO
NEO
... am I dead?
TRINITY
Far from it.
FADE TO BLACK.

FADE IN:

ANGLE ON NEO
He opens his eyes again, something tingling through him.
He focuses and sees his body pierced with dozens of
acupuncture-like needles wired to a strange device.
DOZER
He needs a lot of work.
MORPHEUS
I know.
Dozer and Morpheus are operating on Neo.
NEO
What are you doing?
MORPHEUS
Your muscles have atrophied. We're rebuilding them.
Fluorescent light sticks burn unnaturally bright.
NEO
Why do my eyes hurt?
MORPHEUS
You've never used them before.
Morpheus takes his sunglasses off and puts them on Neo.
Neo lays back.
MORPHEUS
Rest, Neo. The answers are coming.
  
LastIndexNext

? Larry & Andy Wachowski




 
  