


 
25 Of Dispatch 
Affected dispatch is one of the most dangerous things to business that can be. It 
is like that, which the physicians call predigestion, or hasty digestion; which is 
sure to fill the body full of crudities, and secret seeds of diseases. Therefore, 
measure not dispatch by the times of sitting, but by the advancement of the business. 

And as in races, it is not the large stride, or high lift, that makes the speed: so 
in business, the keeping close to the matter, and not taking of it too much at once, procureth dispatch. It is the care of some, only to come off speedily for the time; or to contrive some false periods of business, because they may seem men of dispatch. 

But it is one thing, to abbreviate by contracting, another by cutting off: and business so handled at several sittings or meetings, goeth commonly backward and forward, in an unsteady manner. I knew a wise man, that had it for a by-word, when he saw men hasten to a conclusion; Stay a little, that we may make an end the sooner.

On the other side, true dispatch is a rich thing. For time is the measure of business, as money is of wares: and business is bought at a dear hand, where there is small dispatch. The Spartans, and Spaniards, have been noted to be of small dispatch; Mi venga la muerta de Spagna;

Let my death come from Spain; for then it will be sure to be long in coming.
Give good hearing to those that give the first information in business; and rather 
direct them in the beginning, than interrupt them in the continuance of their speeches: for he that is put out of his own order, will go forward and backward, and be more tedious while he waits upon his memory, than he could have been, if he had gone on in his own course. 
But sometimes it is seen, that the moderator is more troublesome than the actor. Iterations are commonly loss of time: but there is no such gain of time, as to iterate often the state of the question: for it chaselh away many a frivolous speech, as it is coming forth. Long and curious speeches are as fit for dispatch, as a robe or mantle with a long train, is for race. Prefaces, and passages, and excusations, and other speeches of reference to the person, are great wastes of 
time; and though they seem to proceed of modesty, they are bravery. Yet beware of being too material, when there is any impediment or obstruction in men\'s wills; for pre-occupation of mind ever requireth preface of speech;
like a fomentation to make the unguent enter.

Above all things, order, and distribution, and singling out of parts, is me life of 
dispatch; so as the distribution be not too subtle: for he mat doth not divide will 
never enter well into business; and he that divideth too much will never come out 
of it clearly. To choose time is to save time; and an unseasonable motion is but beating the air.
There be three parts of business: the preparation; the debate, or examination; 
and the perfection. Whereof, if you look for dispatch, let the middle only be the 
work of many, and the first and last the work of few. The proceeding upon somewhat conceived in writing, doth for the most part facilitate dispatch: for though it should be wholly rejected, yet that negative is more pregnant of direction than an indefinite; as ashes are more generative than dust
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 