


 
36 Of Ambition 
Ambition is like choler; which is an humour, that maketh men active, earnest, full 
of alacrity, and stirring, if it be not stopped. But if it be stopped, and cannot 
have his way, it becometh adust, and thereby malign and venomous. So ambitious men, 

if they find the way open for their rising, and still get forward, they are rather 
busy than dangerous; but if they be checked in their desires, they become secretly 
discontent, and look upon men and matters, with an evil eye; and are best pleased, 
when things go backward; which is the worst property, in a servant of a prince or 
state. Therefore it is good for princes, if they use ambitious men, to handle it so, 
as they be still progressive, and not retrograde: which because it cannot be without 
inconvenience, it is good not to use such natures at all. For if they rise not with 
their service, they will take order to make their service fall with them. But since 
we have said, it were good not to use men of ambitious natures, except it be upon 
necessity, it is fit we speak in what cases they are of necessity. Good commanders 
in the wars must be taken, be they never so ambitious: for me use of their service 
dispenseth with the rest; and to take a soldier without ambition, is to pull off his 
spurs. 
There is also great use of ambitious men, in being screens to princes, in 
matters of danger and envy: for no man will take that part, except he be like a seeled dove, that mounts and mounts, because he cannot see about him. There is use also of ambitious men, in pulling down the greatness of any subject that overtops: as Tiberius used Macro in the pulling down of Seianus. Since therefore they must be used, in such cases, there resteth to speak how they are to be bridled, that they may be less dangerous. There is less danger of them, if they be of mean birth, than if they be noble: and if they be rather harsh of nature, than gracious and popular: and if they be rather new raised, than grown cunning, and fortified in their greatness. It is counted by some a weakness in princes, to have favourites: but it is, of all others, the best remedy against ambitious great-ones. For when the way of pleasuring and displeasuring lieth by the favourite, it is impossible any other should be over- great. Another means to curb them, is to balance them by others as proud as they. But then, there must be some middle counsellors, to keep things steady: for without that ballast, the ship will roll too much. At the least, a prince may animate and inure some meaner persons, to be, as it were, scourges to ambitious men. 
As for the having of them obnoxious to ruin, if they be of fearful natures, it may do well: but if they be stout, and daring, it may precipitate their designs, and prove dangerous. 

As for the pulling of them down, if the affairs require it, and that it may not be 
done with safety suddenly, the only way is the interchange continually of favours, 
and disgraces; whereby they may not know what to expect; and be, as it were, in a wood. Of ambitions, it is less harmful, the ambition to prevail in great things, than that other, to appear in everything; for that breeds confusion, and mars business. 
But yet, it is less danger to have an ambitious man stirring in business, than great in dependencies. He that seeketh to be eminent amongst able men, 
hath a great task; but that is ever good for the public. But he that plots to be the 
only figure amongst ciphers, is the decay of an whole age. Honour hath three things 
in it: the vantage ground to do good: the approach to kings, and principal persons: and the raising of a man\'s own fortunes. 

He that hath the best of these intentions, when he aspireth, is an honest man: and 
that prince that can discern of these intentions in another that aspireth, is a wise 
prince. Generally, let princes and states choose such ministers, as are more sensible of duty, than of rising; and such as love business rather upon conscience, than upon bravery: and let them discern a busy nature, from a willing mind.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 