


 
37 Of Masques & Triumphs 
These dungs are but toys, to come amongst such serious observations. But yet, since princes will have such things, it is better they should be graced with elegancy, than daubed with cost Dancing to song, is a thing of great state, and pleasure. I understand it, that the song be in choir, placed aloft, and accompanied with some broken music; and the ditty fitted to the device. Acting in song, especially in dialogues, hath an extreme good grace: I say acting, not dancing (for that is a mean and vulgar thing), and the voices of the dialogue would be strong and manly (a bass, and a tenor; no treble) and the ditty high and tragical; not nice or dainty. Several choirs, placed one over against another, and taking the voice by catches, anthem-wise, give great pleasure. 
Turning dances into figure is a childish curiosity. And generally, let it be noted, that those things which I here set down, are such as do naturally take the sense, and not respect petty wonderments. It is true, the alterations of scenes, so it be quietly, and without noise, are things of great beauty, and pleasure: for they feed and relieve the eye, before it be full of the same object. Let the scenes abound with light, specially coloured and varied: and let the masquers, or any other, that are to come down from the scene, have some motions upon the scene itself, before their coming down: for it draws the eye strangely, and makes it with great pleasure, to 
desire to see that it cannot perfectly discern. 
Let the songs be loud, and cheerful, and not chirpings, or pulings. Let the music likewise be sharp, and loud, and well placed. The colours that show best by candlelight are; white, carnation, and a kind of seawater-green; and oes, or spangs, as they are of no great cost, so they are of most glory.
As for rich embroidery, it is lost, and not discerned. Let the suits of the masquers be graceful, and such as become the person, when the vizors are off: not after examples of known attires; Turks, soldiers, mariners, and the like. Let antimasques not be long; they have been commonly of fools, satyrs, baboons, wild-men, antics, beasts, sprites, witches, Ethiopes, pigmies, turquets, nymphs, rustics, cupids, statues moving, and the like. 
As for angels, it is not comical enough, to put them in anti-masques; and any thing that is hideous, as devils, giants, is on the other side as unfit. But chiefly, let the music of them be recreative, and with some strange changes. Some sweet odours, suddenly coming forth, without any drops falling, are, in such a company, as there is steam and heat, things of great pleasure and refreshment. Double masques, one of men, another of ladies, addeth state and variety. But all is nothing, except the room be kept clear and neat. For justs, and tourneys, and barriers; the glories of them are chiefly in the chariots, wherein the challengers make their entry; especially if they be drawn with strange beasts; as lions, bears, camels, and the like:
or in the devices of their entrance; or in the bravery of their liveries; or in the goodly furniture of their horses, and armour. But enough of these toys.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 