


 
42 Of Youth & Age 
A man that is young in years, may be old in hours, if he have lost no time. But that 
happeneth rarely. Generally, youth is like the first cogitations, not so wise as the 
second. For there is a youth in thoughts as well as in ages. And yet the invention 
of young men is more lively than that of old: and imaginations stream into their minds better, and, as it were, more divinely. Natures that have much heat, and great and violent desires and perturbations, are not ripe for action, till they have passed 
the meridian of meir years: as it was with Julius Caesar, and Septimius Severus. Of 
the latter of whom, it is said; iuventutem egit enwibus, imo fwonbus, plenorn. And 
yet he was the ablest emperor, almost, of all me list But reposed natures may do well in youth. As it is seen in Augustus Caesar, Cosmus Duke of Florence, Gaston de Fois, and others. 
On the other side, heat and vivacity in age is an excellent composition 
for business. Young men are fitter to invent, than to judge; fitter for execution, 
than for counsel; and fitter for new projects, man for settled business. For the 
experience of age, in things that fall within the compass of it, directeth them; but 
in new things, abuseth them. The errors of young men are the ruin of business; but 
me errors of aged men amount but to this; that more might have been done, or sooner. 

Young men, in the conduct and manage of actions, embrace more than they can hold, stir more than they can quiet; fly to the end, without consideration of the means, and degrees; pursue some few principles, which they have chanced upon absurdly; care not to innovate, which draws unknown inconveniences; use extreme remedies at first; and, that which doubled all errors, will not acknowledge or retract them; like an unready horse, that will neither stop, nor turn. Men of age object too much, consult too long, adventure too little, repent too soon, and seldom drive business home to the full period; but content themselves with a mediocrity of success. 
Certainly, it is good to compound employments of both; for that will be good for the present, because the virtues of either age may correct the defects of both: and good for succession, mat young men may be learners, while men in age are actors: and lastly, good for extreme accidents, because authority followeth old men, and favour and popularity youth. 
But far the moral part, perhaps youth will have the pre-eminence, as age hath for the politic. A certain rabbin, upon the text; Your young men that see visions, and your old men that dream dreams; inferreth, that young men are admitted nearer to God than old; because vision is a clearer revelation, than a dream. And certainly, me more a man drinketh of the world, the more it intoxicateth; and age doth profit rather in the powers of understanding, man in the virtues of me will and affections. 
There be some have an over-early ripeness in their years, which fadeth betimes: these are first, such as have brittle wits, the edge whereof is soon turned; such as was Hermogenes the Rhetorician, whose books are exceeding subtle; who afterwards waxed stupid. 
A second sort is of those, that have some natural dispositions, which have 
better grace in youth, than in age: such as is a fluent and luxuriant speech; which 
becomes youth well, but not age: so Tully saith of Hortentius; idem manebat, neque 
idem decdxtt. The third is of such as take too high a strain at the first; and are 
magnanimous, more than tract of years can uphold. As was Sdpio Africanus, of whom Livy saith in effect; ultima prims cedebant.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 