


 
45 Of Building 
Houses are built to live in, and not to look on: therefore let use be preferred before 
uniformity; except where both may be had. Leave the goodly fabrics of houses, for 
beauty only, to the enchanted palaces of the poets: who build them wilh small cost 
He that builds a fair house, upon an ill seat, committeth himself to prison. Neither 
do I reckon it an ill seat only where the air is unwholesome; but likewise where the 
air is unequal; as you shall see many fine seats, set upon a knap of ground, environed with higher hills round about it: whereby the heat of the sun is pent in, and the wind gathereth as in troubles; so as you shall have, and that suddenly, as great diversity of heat and cold, as if you dwelt in several places. Neither is it ill air 
only that maketh an ill seat, but ill ways, ill markets; and, if you will consult 
with Momus, ill neighbours. 
I speak not of many more: want of water, want of wood, shade, and shelter, want of fruitfulness, and mixture of grounds of several natures; want of prospect; want of level grounds; want of places, at some near distance, for sports of hunting, hawking, and races; too near the sea, too remote; having the commodity of navigable rivers, or the discommodity of their overflowing; too far off from great cities, which may hinder business; or too near them, which lurcheth all provisions, and maketh every thing dear: where a man hath a great living laid together, and where he is scanted: all which, as it is impossible, perhaps, to find together, so it is good to know them, and think of them, that a man may take as many as he can: and if he have several dwellings, that he sort them so, that what he wanteth in the one, he may find in the other. Lucullus answered Pompey well; who when he saw his stately galleries, and rooms, so large and lightsome, in one of his houses, said;

Surely, an excellent place for summer, but how do you in winter?
Lucullus answered; Why, do you not think me as wise as some fowl are, that ever change their abode towards the winter?

To pass from the seat, to the house itself; we will do as Cicero doth, in the orator\'s art; who writes books De Oratore, and a book he entitles Orator: whereof the former delivers the precepts of the art; and the latter the perfection. We will therefore describe a princely palace, making a brief model thereof. For it is strange to see, now in Europe, such huge buildings as the Vatican, and Escurial, and some others be, and yet scarce a very fair room in them.

First therefore, I say, you cannot have a perfect palace, except you have two several sides; a side for me banquet, as is spoken of in the Book of Hester, and a side for the household: the one for feasts and triumphs, and the other for dwelling. 
I understand both these sides to be not only returns, but parts of the front; and to 
be uniform without, though severally partitioned within; and to be on both sides of 
a great and stately tower, in the midst of the front; that as it were, joinefh them 
together, on either hand. I would have on the side of the banquet, in front, one only 
goodly room, above stairs, of some forty foot high; and under it, a room for a dressing or preparing place, at times of triumphs. On the other side, which is the household side, I wish it divided at the first into a hall, and a chapel (with a partition 
between); both of good state, and bigness: and those not to go all the length, but 
to have, at the further end, a winter and a summer parlour, both fair. And under these rooms, a fair and large cellar, sunk under ground: and likewise, some privy kitchens, with butteries, and pantries, and the like. 
As for the tower, I would have it two storeys, of eighteen foot high a piece, above the two wings; and a goodly leads upon the top, railed with statues interposed; and the same tower to be divided into rooms, as shall be thought fit The stairs likewise, to the upper rooms, let them be upon a fair open newel, and finely railed in, with images of wood, cast into a brass colour: and a very fair landing place at the top. But this to be, if you do not point any of the lower rooms, for a dining place of servants. For otherwise, you shall have the servants\' dinner after your own: for the steam of it will come up as in a tunnel. 

And so much for the front. Only, I understand the height of the first stairs to be 
sixteen foot, which is the height of the lower room.

Beyond this front, is there to be a fair court, but three sides of it, of a far lower 
building than the front. And in all the four comers of that
court, fair staircases, cast into turrets, on the outside, and not within the row 
of buildings themselves. But those towers are not to be of the height of the front; 
but rather proportionable to the lower building. Let the court not be paved, for that 
striketh up a great heat in summer, and much cold in winter. But only some side alleys, with a cross, and me quarters to graze, being kept shorn, but not too near shorn. 
The row of return, on the banquet side, let it be all stately galleries; in which 
galleries, let there be three or four fine cupolas, in me length of it, placed at 
equal distance: and fine coloured windows of several works. On the household side, chambers of presence, and ordinary entertainments, with some bed-chambers; and let all three sides be a double house, without through lights, on the sides, that you may have rooms from the sun, both for forenoon, and afternoon. Cast it also, that you may have-rooms, born for summer, and winter. shady for summer, and warm for winter. 

You shall have sometimes fair houses, so full of glass, that one cannot tell where 
to become, to be out of the sun, or cold: for inbowed windows, I hold them of good use; (in cities indeed, upright do better, in respect of the uniformity towards the street;) for they be pretty retiring places for conference; and besides, they keep 
both the wind and sun off: for that which would strike almost through the room, doth scarce pass the window. But let them be but few, four in the court, on the sides only.

Beyond this court, let there be an inward court of the same square and height; which is to be environed, with the garden, on all sides: and in the inside, cloistered on all sides, upon decent and beautiful arches, as high as the first storey. On the under storey, towards the garden, let it be turned to a grotto, or place of shade, or estivation. And only have opening and windows towards the garden; and be level upon the floor, no whit sunk under ground, to avoid all dampishness. And let there be a fountain, or some fair work of statues, in the midst of this court; and to be paved as the other court was. These buildings to be for privy lodgings, on both sides; and the end, for privy galleries. 
Whereof, you must foresee, that one of them be for an infirmary, if the prince or any special person should be sick, with chambers, bed-chamber, antecamera, and recamera, joining to it This upon the second storey. Upon the ground storey, a fair gallery, open, upon pillars: and upon uie third storey likewise, an open gallery upon pillars, to take the prospect, and freshness of the garden. 
At both comers of the further side, by way of return, let there be two delicate or rich cabinets, daintily paved, richly hanged, glazed with crystalline glass, and a rich cupola in die midst; and all other elegancy that may be thought upon. In the upper gallery too, I wish that there may be, if the place will yield it, some fountains running, in divers places, from the wall, with some fine avoidances. And thus much, for the model of the palace: save that you must have, before you come to the front, three courts. A green court plain, with a wall about it: a second court of the same, but more garnished, with little turrets, or rather embellishments, upon the wall: and a third court, to make a square with the front, but not to be built, nor yet enclosed with a naked wall, but enclosed with terraces, leaded aloft, and fairly garnished, on the three sides; and cloistered on the inside, with pillars, and not with arches below. 
As for offices, let them stand at distance, with some lofty galleries, to pass 
from them to the palace itself.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 