


 
46 Of Gardens 
God Almighty first planted a garden. And indeed, it is the purest of human pleasure. It is the greatest refreshment to the spirits of man;
without which buildings and palaces are but gross handy-works: and a man shall ever see, that when ages grow to civility and elegance, men come to build stately, sooner than to garden finely: as if gardening were the greater perfection. I do hold it, in the royal ordering of gardens, there ought to be gardens, for all the months in 
me year: in which, severally, things of beauty may be then in season. For December, and January, and the latter part of November, you must take such things as are green all winter: holly; ivy; bays; juniper, cypress trees; yew; pineapple trees; fir trees; rosemary; lavender, periwinkle, the white, the purple, and the blue; germander, flags; orange trees; lemon trees; and myrtles, if they be stoved; and sweet marjoram warm set. 
There followeth, for the latter part of January, and February, the mezereon tree, 
which then blossoms; avcusvemus, both the yellow, and the grey; primroses; anemones; the early tulip; hyadnthus onentalis; dmvsris;ftili!iana. For March, there come violets, specially the single blue, which are the earliest; the yellow daffodil;
the daisy; the almond tree in blossom; the peach tree in blossom; the cornelian tree 
in blossom; sweet briar. 
In April follow, the double white violet; the wallflower, the stock gillyflower, the cowslip, fleur-de-lis, and lilies of [all] natures; rosemary flowers; the tulip; the double peony; the pale daffodil; the French honeysuckle; the cherry tree in blossom; the damson and plum trees in blossom; the white thorn in leaf; the lilac tree. In May and June, come pinks of all sorts, specially the blush pink; roses of all kinds, except the musk, which comes later, honeysuckles; strawberries; bugloss; columbine; the French marigold; ftos qfiiainus; cheny tree in fruit, rihs., figs in fruit;
raspberries; vine flowers; lavender in flowers; the sweet satyrian, with the white 
flower, herba nvsoana; iilaan comaSwm; the apple tree in blossom. In July, come 
gillyflowers of all varieties; musk roses; the lime tree in blossom; early pears, 
and plums in fruit; ginnitings; quadlins. In August, come plums of all sorts in fruit; pears; apricots; berberries; filberts; musk melons; monks-hoods, of all colours. In September, come grapes; apples; poppies of all colours; peaches; melo-cotones; nectarines; cornelians; wardens; quinces. In October, and the beginning of November, come services; medlars; bullises; roses cut or removed to come late; holly oaks; and such like. 
These particulars are for the climate of London; but my meaning is perceived, that you may have verperpeCuwn, as the place affords.

And because me breath of flowers is far sweeter in the air (where it comes and goes, like the warbling of music) than in the hand, therefore nothing is more fit for that delight, than to know, what be the flowers, and plants that do best perfume the air. 
Roses, damask and red, are fast flowers of their smells; so that you may walk by a 
whole row of them, and find nothing of their sweetness; yea though it be in a morning\'s dew. Bays likewise yield no smell, as they grow. Rosemary little; nor sweet marjoram. 

That which above all others yields the sweetest smell in the air, is the violet; 
specially the white double violet, which comes twice a year, about the middle of April, and about Bartholomew-tide. Next to that is, the musk rose. Then the strawberry leaves dying, which [yield] a most excellent cordial smell. Then the flower of me vines; it is a little dust, like the dust of a bent, which grows upon the cluster, in the first coming forth. Then sweet briar. Then wallflowers, which are very delightful, to be set under a parlour, or lower chamber window. Then pinks, [and gillyflowers,] specially the matted pink, and clove gillyflower. Then the flowers of the lime tree. 
Then the honeysuckles, so they be somewhat a far off. Of bean flowers I speak not, because they are field flowers. But those which perfume the air most delightfully, not passed by as me rest, but being trodden upon and crushed, are three: that is bumet, wild thyme, and water mints. Therefore, you are to set whole alleys of them, to have the pleasure, when you walk or tread.

For gardens, (speaking of those, which are indeed princelike, as we have done of 
buildings) the contents ought not well to be under thirty acres of ground; and to 
be divided into three parts: a green in the entrance; a heath or desert in die going 
forth; and the [main] garden in the midst; besides alleys, on both sides. And I like 
well, that four acres of ground be assigned to the green; six to the heath; four and 
four to either side; and twelve to the main garden. The green hath two pleasures, 
the one, because nothing is more pleasant to the eye, than green grass kept finely 
shorn; the other, because it will give you a fair alley in the midst, by which you 
may go in front upon a stately hedge, which is to enclose the garden. 
But, because the alley will be long, and in great heat of the year, or day, you ought not to buy the shade, in the garden, by going in the sun through the green, therefore you are, of either side the green, to plant a covert alley, upon carpenter\'s work, about twelve foot in height, by which you may go in shade into the garden. As for the making of knots, or figures, with divers coloured earths, mat they may lie under the windows of the house, on that side which the garden stands, they be but toys: you may see as good sights, many times, in tarts. T
The garden is best to be square; encompassed, on all the four sides, with a stately arched hedge. The arches to be upon pillars, of carpenter\'s work, of some ten foot high, and six foot broad: and the spaces between, of the same dimension, with the breadth of the arch. Over the arches, let there be an entire hedge, of some four foot high, framed also upon carpenter\'s work: and upon the upper hedge, over every arch, a little turret, with a belly, enough to receive a cage of birds: and over every space, between the arches, some other lime figure, with broad plates of round coloured glass, gilt, for the sun to play upon. But mis hedge I intend to be raised upon a bank, not steep, but gently slope, of some six foot, set all with flowers. 
Also I understand, that this square of the garden, should not be the whole breadth of the ground, but to leave, on either side, ground enough for diversity of side alleys: unto which, the two covert alleys of the green may deliver you. But there must be no alleys with hedges, at either end, of this great enclosure: not at the hither end, for letting your prospect upon mis fair hedge from the green; nor at the further end, for letting your prospect from the hedge, through the arches, upon the heath.

For the ordering of the ground, within the great hedge, I leave it to variety of device; advising nevertheless, that whatsoever form you cast it into, first it be not too busy, or full of work. Wherein I, for my part, do not like images cut out in juniper, or other garden stuff: they be for children. Little low hedges, round, like welts, with some pretty pyramids, I like well: and in some places, fair columns upon frames of carpenter\'s work. I would also have the alleys spacious and fair. 
You may have closer alleys upon the side grounds but none in the main garden. I wish also, in the very middle, a fair mount, with three ascents, and alleys, enough for four to walk abreast; which I would have to be perfect circles, without any bulwarks, or embossment; and the whole mount, to be thirty foot high; and some fine banqueting house, with some chimneys neatly cast, and without too much glass.

For fountains, they are a great beauty, and refreshment; But pools mar all, and make the garden unwholesome, and full of flies, and frogs. Fountains I intend to be of two natures: the one, that sprinkleth or spouteth water, the other a fair receipt 
of water, of some thirty or forty foot square, but without fish, or slime, or mud. 
For the first, the ornaments of images gilt, or of marble, which are in use, do well: 
but the main matter is so to convey the water, as it never stay, either in the bowls, 
or in the cistern; that the water be never by rest discoloured, green, or red, or 
the like: or gather any mossiness or putrefaction. Besides that, it is to be cleansed 
every day by the hand. Also some steps up to it, and some fine pavement about it, 
doth well. 
As for the other kind of fountain, which we may call a bathing pool, it may admit much curiosity, and beauty; wherewith we will not trouble ourselves: as, 
that the bottom be finely paved, and with images: the sides likewise; and withal 
embellished with coloured glass, and such things of lustre; encompassed also, with 
fine rails of low statues. But the main point is the same, which we mentioned, in 
the former kind of fountain; which is, that the water be in perpetual motion, fed 
by a water higher than the pool and delivered into it by fair spouts, and then 
discharged away under ground, by some equality of bores, that it stay little. And 
for fine devices, of arching water without spilling, and making it rise in several 
forms (of feathers, drinking glasses, canopies, and the like), they be pretty things 
to look on, but nothing to health and sweetness.
For the heath, which was the third part of our plot, I wish it to be framed, as much 
as may be, to a natural wildness. Trees I would have none in it; but some thickets, 
made only of sweet-briar, and honeysuckle, and some wild vine amongst; and the ground set with violets, strawberries, and primroses. For these are sweet, and prosper in the shade. 
And these to be in the heath, here and there, not in any order. I like 
also little heaps, in the nature of mole-hills (such as are in wild heaths), to be 
set, some with wild thyme; some with pinks; some with germander, that gives a good flower to the eye; some with periwinkles; some with violets; some with strawberries; some with cowslips; some with daisies; some with red roses; some with lilium convallium; some with sweet-williams red; some with bears-foot; and the like low flowers, being withal sweet, and sightly. Part of which heaps, to be with standards of little bushes, pricked upon their top, and part without. 

The standards to be roses; jumper, holly; berberries (but here and there, because of the smell of their blossom); red currants; gooseberries; rosemary; bays; sweet-briar; and such like. But these standards to be kept with cutting, that they grow not out of course.

For the side grounds, you are to fill them with variety of alleys, private, to give 
a full shade; some of them, wheresoever the sun be. You are to frame some of them likewise for shelter, that when the wind blows sharp, you may walk, as in a gallery. 

And those alleys must be likewise hedged, at both ends, to keep out the wind; and 
these closer alleys, must be ever finely gravelled, and no grass, because of going 
wet In many of these alleys likewise, you are to set fruit trees of all sorts; as 
well upon the walls, as in ranges. And this would be generally observed, that the 
borders, wherein you plant your fruit trees, be fair and large, and low, and not steep; and set with fine flowers, but thin and sparingly, lest they deceive trees. At the end of both the side grounds, I would have a mount of some pretty height, leaving the wall of the enclosure, breast high, to look abroad into the fields.

For the main garden, I do not deny, but there should be some fair alleys, ranged on 
both sides, with fruit trees; and some pretty tufts of fruit trees, and arbours with 
seats, set in some decent order; but these to be by no means set too thick; but to 
leave the main garden, so as it be not close, but the air open and free. For as for 
shade, I would have you rest upon the alleys of the side grounds, there to walk, if 
you be disposed, in the heat of the year, or day; but to make account, that the main 
garden is for the more temperate parts of the year; and in the heat of summer, for 
the morning, and the evening, or over-cast days.

For aviaries, I like them not, except they be of that largeness, as they may be turfed, and have living plants, and bushes, set in them; that the birds may have more scope, and natural nesting, and that no foulness appear in the floor of the aviary. So I have made a platform of a princely garden, partly by precept, partly by drawing, not a model, but some general lines of it; and in this I have spared for no cost. But it is nothing for great princes, that for the most part, taking advice with workmen, with no less cost, set their things together, and sometimes add statues, and such things, for state, and magnificence, but nothing to the true pleasure of a garden.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 