


 
47 Of Negotiating 
It is generally better to deal by speech, than by letter; and by the mediation of 
a third, than by a man\'s self. Letters are good, when a man would draw an answer by letter back again; or when it may seem, for a man\'s justification, afterwards to 
produce his own letter, or where it may be danger to be interrupted, or heard by pieces. 

To deal in person is good, when a man\'s face breedelh regard, as commonly with 
inferiors; or in tender cases, where a man\'s eye, upon the countenance of him with 
whom he speaketh, may give him a direction, how far to go: and generally, where a 
man will reserve to himself liberty either to disavow, or to expound. In choice of 
instruments, it is better to choose men of a plainer sort, that are like to do that, 
that is committed to them, and to report back again faithfully the success; than those, that are cunning to contrive out of other men\'s business, somewhat to grace themselves; and will help the matter, in report, for satisfaction sake. 
Use also such persons as affect the business, wherein they are employed; for that quickeneth much; and such as are fit for the matter, as bold men for expostulation, fair spoken men for persuasion, crafty men for enquiry and observation, froward and absurd men for business that doth not well bear out itself. Use also such as have been lucky, and prevailed before in things wherein you have employed them; for that breeds confidence, and they will strive to maintain their prescription. 
It is better to sound a person, with whom one deals, a far off, than to fall upon the point at first; except you mean to surprise him by some short question. It is better dealing with men in appetite, than with those that are where they would be. If a man deal with another upon conditions, the start or first performance is all; which a man cannot reasonably demand, except either the nature of the thing be such, which must go before; or else a man can persuade the other party, that he shall still need him, in some other thing; or else that he be counted the honester man. 
All practice is to discover, or to work. Men discover themselves, in trust; in passion; at unawares; and of necessity, when they would have somewhat done, and 
cannot find an apt pretext If you would work any man, you must either know his nature, and fashions, and so lead him; or his ends, and so persuade him; or his weakness, and disadvantages, and so awe him; or those that have interest in him, and so govern him. 
In dealing with cunning persons, we must ever consider their ends, to interpret 
their speeches; and it is good to say little to them, and that which they least look 
for. In all negotiations of difficulty, a man may not look to sow and reap at once; 
but must prepare business, and so ripen it by degrees.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 