


 
48 Of Followers & Friends 
Costly followers are not to be liked; lest while a man maketh his train longer, he 
make his wings shorter. I reckon to be costly, not them alone, which charge the purse, but which are wearisome and importune in suits. Ordinary followers ought to challenge no higher conditions, than countenance, recommendation, and protection from wrongs. 
Factious followers are worse to be liked, which follow not upon affection to him, 
with whom they range themselves, but upon discontentment conceived against some other: whereupon commonly ensueth that ill intelligence, that we many times see between great personages. Likewise glorious followers, who make themselves as trumpets, of the commendation of those they follow, are full of inconvenience; for they taint business through want of secrecy; and they export honour from a man, and make him a return in envy. 
There is a kind of followers likewise, which are dangerous, being indeed 
espials; which enquire the secrets of the house, and bear tales of them to others. 

Yet such men, many times, are in great favour; for they are officious, and commonly exchange tales. The following by certain estates of men, answerable to that which a great person himself professeth (as of soldiers to him that hath been employed in me wars, and the like), hath ever been a thing civil, and well taken even in monarchies; so it be without too much pomp or popularity. But the most honourable kind of following, is to be followed as one that apprehendeth, to advance virtue and desert, in all sorts of persons. 
And yet, where there is no eminent odds in sufficiency, it is better to take with me more passable, than with the more able. And besides, to speak truth, in base times, active men are of more use, than virtuous. It is true that in government, it is good to use men of one rank equally: for to countenance some extraordinarily, is to make them insolent, and the rest discontent; because they may claim a due. 
But contrariwise in favour, to use men with much difference and election, is good; for it makelh the persons preferred more thankful, and the rest more officious; because all is of favour. It is good discretion, not to make too much of any man, at the first; because one cannot hold out that proportion. 
To be governed (as we call it) by one, is not safe: for it shows softness, and gives a freedom to scandal and disreputation: for those that would not censure, or speak ill of a man immediately, will talk more boldly of those that are so great with them, and thereby wound their honour. Yet to be distracted with many is worse; for it makes men to be of the last impression, and full of change. To take advice of some few friends is ever honourable; for lookers-on, many times, see more than gamesters; and the vale best discovered! the hill. There is little friendship in the world, and least of all between equals, which was wont to be magnified. That that is, is between superior and inferior, whose fortunes may comprehend, the one the other.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 