 



 
50 Of Studies 
Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief use for delight, 
is in privateness and retiring; for ornament, is in discourse; and for ability, is in the judgement and disposition of business. For expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of particulars, one by one; but the general counsels, and the plots, and marshalling of affairs, come best from those that are learned. 
To spend too much time in studies, is sloth; to use them too much for ornament, is affectation; to make judgement wholly by their rules is the humour of a scholar. They perfect nature, and are perfected by experience: for natural abilities are like natural plants, that need pruning by study: and studies themselves do give forth directions too much at large, except they be bounded in by experience. 

Crafty men condemn studies; simple men admire them; and wise men use them: for they teach not their own use; but that is a wisdom without them, and above them, won by observation. Read not to contradict, and confute; nor to believe and take for granted; nor to find talk and discourse; but to weigh and consider. Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and digested: that is, some books are to be read only in parts; others to be read but not curiously; and some few to be read wholly, and with diligence and attention. 
Some books also may be read by deputy, and extracts made of them by others: but that would be, only in the less important arguments, and the meaner sort of book: else distilled books are like common distilled waters, flashy things. Reading maketh a full man; conference a ready man; and writing an exact man. 
And therefore, if a man write little, he had need have a great memory; 
if he confer lime, he had need have a present wit; and if he read little, he had need 
have much cunning, to seem to know that he doth not. Histories make men wise; poets witty; the mathematics subtle; natural philosophy deep; moral grave;
logic and rhetoric able to contend. AbeuntstucSa in mores. Nay, there is no stond 
or impediment in the wit, but may be wrought out by fit studies: like as diseases 
of the body may have appropriate exercises. Bowling is good for the stone and reins; shooting for the lungs and breast; gentle walking for the stomach; riding for the head; and the like. 
So if a man\'s wit be wandering, let him study the mathematics; for in demonstrations, if his wit be called away never so little, he must begin again: 
if his wit be not apt to distinguish or find differences, let him study the schoolmen; 
for they are cymnisectores. If he be not apt to beat over matters, and to call up 
one thing, to prove and illustrate another, let him study the lawyers\' cases: so every 
defect of the mind may have a special receipt.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 