


 
52 Of Ceremonies & Respects 
He that is only real, had need have exceeding great parts of virtue: as the stone 
had need to be rich, that is set without foil. But if a man mark it well, it is in 
praise and commendation of men as it is in gettings and gains: for the proverb is 
true, that light gains make heavy purses; for light gains come thick, whereas great 
come but now and then. So it is true, that small matters win great commendation, 
because they are continually in use, and in note: whereas the occasion of any great 
virtue cometh but on festivals. 
Therefore it doth much add to a man\'s reputation, and is (as Queen Isabella said) like perpetual letters commendatory, to have good forms. To attain them, it almost sufficeth, not to despise them: for so shall a man observe them in others: and let him trust himself with the rest. For if he labour too much to express them, he shall lose their grace; which is to be natural and unaffected. 
Some men\'s behaviour is like a verse, wherein every syllable is measured: 
how can a man comprehend great matters, that hreaketh his mind too much to small observations? Not to use ceremonies at all, is to teach others not to use them again; and so diminisheth respect to himself: especially they be not to be omitted to 
strangers, and formal natures: but the dwelling upon them, and exalting them above 
the moon, is not only tedious, but doth diminish the faith and credit of him that 
speaks. 
And certainly, there is a kind of conveying of effectual and imprinting 
passages, amongst compliments, which is of singular use, if a man can hit upon it 
Amongst a man\'s peers, a man shall be sure of familiarity; and therefore, it is good 
a little to keep state. Amongst a man\'s inferiors, one shall be sure of reverence; 
and therefore it is good a little to be familiar. He that is too much in anything, 
so that he giveth another occasion of satiety, maketh himself cheap. To apply one\'s self to others is good: so it be with demonstration, that a man doth it upon regard and not upon facility. It is a good precept, generally in seconding another, yet to add somewhat of one\'s own: as if you will grant his opinion, let it be with some distinction; if you will follow his motion, let it be with condition; if you allow 
his counsel, let it be with alleging further reason. Men had need beware, how they 
be too perfect in compliments; for be they never so sufficient otherwise, their 
enviers will be sure to give them that attribute, to the disadvantage of their greater 
virtues. It is loss also in business, to be too full of respects, or to be too curious 
in observing times and opportunities. Solomon saith; He that considered! the wind 
shall not sow, and he that looketh to the clouds shall not reap. A wise man will make more opportunities than he finds. Men\'s behaviour should be like their apparel, not too strait, or point device, but free for exercise or motion.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 