


 
55 Of Honour & Reputation 
The winning of honour is but the revealing of a man\'s virtue and worth, without 
disadvantage. For some in their actions do woo and affect honour and reputation. 
Which sort of men are commonly much talked of, but inwardly little admired. And some, contrariwise, darken their virtue, in the show of it; so as they be undervalued in opinion. If a man perform that which hath not been attempted before; or attempted and given over, or ham been achieved, but not with so good circumstance; he shall purchase more honour, than by effecting a matter of greater difficulty, or virtue, wherein he is but a follower. If a man so temper his actions, as in some one of them he doth content every faction, or combination of people, the music will be the fuller. 

A man is an ill husband of his honour, that entereth into any action, the failing 
wherein may disgrace him more, than the carrying of it through can honour him. Honour that is gained and broken upon another, hath the quickest reflection; like diamonds cut with facets. 
And therefore, let a man contend to excel any competitors of his in honour, in out-shooting them, if he can, in their own bow. Discreet followers and servants help much to reputation. Onuus farm a danestids emanat. Envy, which is me 
canker of honour, is best extinguished by declaring a man\'s self in his ends, rather 
to seek merit, man fame: and by attributing a man\'s successes, rather to divine 
providence and felicity, than to his own virtue or policy. The true marshalling of 
the degrees of sovereign honour are these. In the first place are concStorvsynperionan; founders of states, and commonwealths: such as were Romulus, Cyrus, Caesar, Ottoman, Ismael. In the second place are kgidttones, lawgivers; which are also called, second founders, or papead prindpes, because they govern by their ordinances, after they are gone: such were Lycurgus, 
Solon, Justinian, Eadgar, Alphonsus of Castile, the Wise, that made the Siete Parados. 

In the third place are Sbemta-es, or sahcams: such as compound the long miseries of civil wars, or deliver their countries from servitude of strangers or tyrants; as 
Augustus Caesar, Vespasianus, Aurelianus, Theodoricus, Henry VH of England and Henry IV of France. In me fourth place are propa^JSores or prnpugnatores imperil; such as in honourable wars enlarge their territories, or make noble defence against invaders
And in the last place are patres patriae; which reign justly, and make the times good, wherein they live. Both which last kinds need no examples, they are in such number. 
Degrees of honour in subjects are; first, paiHapes cwarwn; those upon whom princes do discharge the greatest weight of their affairs; their right hands, as we call them. 
The next are duces beS, great leaders; such as are princes\' lieutenants, and do them notable services in the wars. The third are ^arias\', favourites; such as exceed not this scantling; to be solace to the sovereign, and harmless to the people. And the fourth, negotas pares; such as have great places under princes, and execute their places with sufficiency. 

There is an honour likewise, which may be ranked amongst the greatest, which happeneth rarely: that is, of such as sacrifice themselves, to death or danger, for the good of their country: as was M. Regulus, and the two Decii.
 
LastIndexNext

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 