


 
58 Of Vicissitude of Things 
Solomon saith; There is no new thing upon the earth. So that as Plato had an imagination, that all knowledge was but remembrance: so Solomon giveth his sentence, that all novelty is but oblivion. 
Whereby you may see, that the river of Lethe runneth as well above ground, as below. There is an abstruse astrologer that saith; If it were not for two things, that are constant (the one is, that (he fixed stars ever stand at like distance, one from another, and never come nearer together, nor go further asunder, the other, that the diurnal motion perpetually keepeth time); no individual would last one moment 
Certain it is, that the matter is in a perpetual flux, and never at a stay. The great winding-sheets, that bury all things in oblivion, are two; deluges, and earthquakes. As for conflagrations, and great droughts, they do not merely dispeople, and destroy. Phaeton\'s car went but a day. And the three years\' drought, in the time of Elias, was but particular, and left people alive. 
As for the great burnings by lightnings, which are often in the West Indies, they are but narrow. 

But in the other two destructions, by deluge, and earthquake, it is further to be 
noted, that the remnant of people which hap to be preserved, are commonly ignorant and mountainous people, that can give no account of the time past: so that the oblivion is all one, as if none had been left. If you consider well, of the people of the West Indies, it is very probable that they are newer or a younger people, than the people of the old world. And it is much more likely, that the destruction that hath heretofore been there, was not by earthquakes (as the Egyptian priest told Solon, concerning the Island of Auantis; that it was swallowed by an earthquake), but rather, that it was desolated by a particular deluge. For earthquakes are seldom in those parts. But on the other side, they have such pouring rivers, as the rivers of Asia and Africa and Europe are but brooks to them. Their Andes likewise, or mountains, arc far higher than those with us;

whereby it seems that the remnants of generation of men were, in such a particular 
deluge, saved. As for the observation, that Macbeth hath, that the jealousies of sects doth much extinguish the memory of things; traducing Gregory the Great, that he did what in him lay, to extinguish all heathen antiquities; I do not find that those zeals do any great effects, nor last long: as it appeared in the succession of Sabinian, who did revive the former antiquities.

The vicissitudes or mutations in the superior globe, are no fit matter for this present 
argument. It may be, Plato\'s great year, if the world should last so long, would have some effect; not in renewing the state of like individuals (for that is the fume of those that conceive the celestial bodies have more accurate influences upon these things below, than indeed they have), but in gross. Comets, out of question, have likewise power and effect, over the gross and mass things: but they are rather gazed upon, and waited upon in their journey, than wisely observed in their effects; 
specially in their respective effects; that is, what kind of comet, for magnitude, colour, version of the beams, placing in the region of heaven, or lasting, produceth what kind of effects
There is a toy which I have heard, and I would not have it given over, but waited 
upon a little. They say, it is observed in the Low Countries (I know not in what part) that every five and thirty years, the same kind and suit of years and weathers comes about again: as great frosts, great wet, great droughts, warm winters, summers with little heat, and the like: and they call it the prime. It is a thing I do the rather mention, because computing backwards, I have found some concurrence.

But to leave these points of nature, and to come to men. The greatest vicissitude 
of things amongst men, is the vicissitude of sects and religions. For those orbs rule 
in men\'s minds most The true religion is built upon the rock; the rest are tossed 
upon the waves of time. To speak therefore, of the causes of new sects; and to give some counsel concerning them; as far as the weakness of human judgement, can give stay to so great revolutions.

When the religion formerly received is rent by discords; and when the holiness of 
the professors of religion is decayed, and full of scandal; and withal the times be stupid, ignorant, and barbarous; you may doubt the springing up of a new sect; if then also there should arise any extravagant and strange spirit, to make himself author thereof. All which points held, when Mohammed published his 
law. If a new sect have not two properties, fear it not: for it will not spread. The 
one is, the supplanting, or the opposing, of authority established: for nothing is 
more popular than that. The other is, the giving licence to pleasures, and a voluptuous life. For as for speculative heresies (such as were in ancient times the Arians, and now the Armenians) though they work mightily upon men\'s wits, yet they do not produce any great alterations in states; except it be by the help of civil occasions. 
There be three manner of plantations of new sects. By the power of signs and miracles: by the eloquence and wisdom of speech and persuasion: and by the sword. For martyrdoms, I reckon them amongst miracles; because they seem to exceed the strength of human nature: and I may do the like of superlative and admirable holiness of life. 
Surely, there is no better way to stop the rising of new sects, and schisms; than to reform abuses; to compound the smaller differences; to proceed mildly, and not with sanguinary prosecutions; and rather to take off the principal authors, by winning and advancing them, than to enrage them by violence and bitterness.

The changes and vicissitude in wars are many: but chiefly in three things; in the 
seats or stages of the war, in the weapons; and in the manner of the conduct Wars 
in ancient time seemed more to move from east to west: for the Persians, Assyrians, Arabians, Tartars, (which were the invaders) were all eastern people. It is true, the Gauls were western; but we read but of two incursions of theirs; the one to Gallo-Graecia, the other to Rome. But east and west have no certain points of heaven: and no more have the wars, either from the east, or west, any certainty of observation. 

But north and south are fixed; and it hath seldom or never been seen, that the far 
southern people have invaded the northern, but contrariwise. Whereby it is manifest, mat the northern tract of the world is in nature the more martial region:
be it in respect of the stars of that hemisphere; or of the great continents that 
are upon the north, whereas the south part, for ought that is known, is almost all 
sea; or (which is most apparent) of the cold of the northern parts, which is that 
which without aid of discipline doth make the bodies hardest, and me courages warmest

Upon the breaking and shivering of a great state and empire, you may be sure to have wars. For great empires, while they stand, do enervate and destroy the forces of the natives, which they have subdued, resting upon their own protecting forces: and then when they fail also, all goes to ruin, and they become a prey. So was it, in the decay of the Roman empire; and likewise, in the empire of Almaigne, after Charles the Great, every bird taking a feather, and were not unlike to befall to Spain, if it should break. The great accessions and unions of kingdoms do likewise stir up quarrel. 
For when a state grows to an over-power, it is like a great flood, that will be sure to 
overflow. As it hath been seen, in the states of Rome, Turkey, Spain, and others. 
Look when the world hath fewest barbarous peoples, but such as commonly will not many or generate, except they know means to live (as it is almost everywhere at this day, except Tartary); there is no danger of inundations of people: but when there be great shoals of people, which go on to populate, without foreseeing means of life and sustentation, it is of necessity, that once in an age or two, they discharge a portion of their people upon other nations: which the ancient northern people were wont to do by lot: casting lots, what part should stay at home, and what should seek their fortunes. When a warlike state grows soft and effeminate, they may be sure of a war. 

For commonly such states are grown rich, in the time of their degenerating; and so 
the prey inviteth, and their decay in valour encourageth a war.

As for the weapons, it hardly falleth under rule and observation: yet we see, even 
they have returns and vicissitudes. For certain it is, that ordnance was known in 
the city of the Oxidrakes in India: and was that, which the Macedonians called thunder and lightning, and magic. And it is well known, that the use of ordnance hath been in China above two thousand years. The conditions of weapons, and their improvement are; first, the fetching a far off: for that outruns the danger: as it is seen in ordnance and muskets. Secondly, the strength of the percussion; wherein likewise ordnance do exceed all arietations, and ancient inventions. The third is, the 
commodious use of them: as that they may serve in all weathers; that the carriage 
may be light and manageable; and the like.

For the conduct of the war: at the first, men rested extremely upon number: they did put the wars likewise upon main force, and valour, pointing days for pitched fields, and so trying it out, upon an even match: and they were more ignorant in ranging and arraying their battles. After they grew to rest upon number, rather competent, than vast: they grew to advantages of place, cunning diversions, and the like: and they grew more skilful in the ordering of their battles. hi the youth of a state, arms do flourish: in the middle age of a state, learning; and then both of them together for a time: in the declining age of a state, mechanical arts and merchandise. Learning hath his infancy, when it is but beginning, and almost childish: then his youth, when it is luxuriant and juvenile: then his strength of years, when it is solid and reduced: and lastly, his old age, when it waxeth dry and exhaust. But it is not good, to look too long upon these turning wheels of vicissitude, lest we become giddy. As for the philology of them, mat is but a circle of tales, and therefore not fit for this writing.
A Fragment of an Essay of Fame The poets make fame a monster. They describe her, in part, finely, and elegantly; and, in part, gravely, and sentendously. They say, look how many feathers she hath. so many eyes she hath underneath: so many tongues; so many voices; she pricks up so many ears.

This is a flourish: there follow excellent parables; as that, she gathereth strength 
in going; that she goeth upon the ground, and yet hideth her head in the clouds. 
That, in the day time, she sitteth in a watch tower, and flieth most by night: that she 
mingleth things done, with things not done: and that she is a terror to great cities: 
but that which passeth all the rest, is: they do recount that the earth, mother of 
the giants that made war against Jupiter, and were by him destroyed, thereupon, in 
an anger, brought forth fame: for certain it is, that rebels, figured by the giants, 
and seditious fames, and libels, are but brothers, and sisters; masculine, and 
feminine. But now, if a man can tame this matter, and bring her to feed at the hand, 
and govern her, and with her fly other ravening fowl, and kill them, it is somewhat 
worth. But we are infected with the style of the poets. To speak now in a sad, and 
serious manner: there is not, in all the politics, a place less handled, and more 
worthy to be handled, than this of fame. We will, theretofore, speak of these points. 

What are false fames; and what are true fames; and how they may be best discerned; how fames may be sown, and raised; how they may be spread, and multiplied; and how they may be checked, and laid dead. And other things, concerning the nature of fame. 

Fame is of that force, as there is scarcely any great action wherein it hath not a 
great part; especially, in the war. Mucianus undid Vitellius by a fame that he 
scattered; that Vitellius had in purpose, to remove the legions of Syria into Germany; and the regions of Germany into Syria: whereupon the legions of Syria were infinitely inflamed. Julius Caesar took Pompey unprovided, and laid asleep his industry, and preparations, by a fame that he cunningly gave out; how Caesar\'s own soldiers loved him not; and being wearied with the wars, and laden with the spoils of Gaul, would forsake him, as soon as he came into Italy. Livia settled all things, for the succession of her son Tiberius, by continual giving out that her husband Augustus was upon recovery, and amendment And it is an usual thing, with the bashaws, to conceal the death of the great Turk from the Janissaries, and men of war, to save the sacking of Constantinople, and other towns, as their manner is. Themistocles made Xerxes, king of Persia, post apace out ofGraecia, by giving out that the Grecians had a purpose to break his bridge of ships, which he made athwart Hellespont There be a thousand such like examples;
and the more they are, the less they need to be repeated; because a man meeteth with them everywhere: therefore, let all wise governors have as great a watch, and care, over fames, as they have of the actions and designs themselves.
The rest was not finished.
Index of Quotations and Foreign Phrases with Translations
The figures in brackets refer to the pages.
abeunt studia in mores (139) Studies pass into [i.e. go to form]
character.
adeste, si (8) Come now, if anything remains for me to do. amid curiae... parasiti 
curiae (152) friends of the court... parasites of
the court. animasque in vulnere (154) and leave Iheir lives [\'souls\'] in the wound. at domus 
(100) But the house of Aeneas shall rule over all the coasts
- his children\'s children, and those that shall be born of them. atque is habitus 
(44) The temper of men\'s minds was such that while
only a few dared to do so vile a deed, many desired it and all
acquiesced in it
Caesarem portas (112) You cany Caesar and his fortune. cogita quam diu (7) Consider 
how long you have been doing the same
things: death may be desired not only by the valiant or the
miserable, but also by the victim of ennui. communia maledicta (155) ill words 
applicable to all and sundry. concession propter duritiem cordis (113) a thing allowed 
on account of
the hardness of men\'s hearts (cf. Matthew xix: 8). conflata magna invidia (39) When 
great ill-will has been conceived
[towards a ruler], all his acts, good or bad, alike condemn him. consiliwn Pompeii 
(86) Pompey follows a truly Themistoclean policy:
he thinks that he who commands the sea, commands all. cum non sis (30) When you are 
no longer the man you have been,
there is no reason why you should wish to live. cymini sectores (139) dividers of 
cummin seed, \'hair-splitters\'.
de facto (31) as a fact, as an actual possession.
desembottwa (111) \'dexterity, readiness\' (so defined in Richard
Percyvall\'s Bibliotheca Hispamca, 1591); adroitness which finds an
easy and graceful outlet on all occasions for what it is in a man to
do or say. devitaprcfams (11) Avoid profane novelties of words and oppositions
of science falsely so called (I Timothy vi: 20). dolervS modus (41) There is a limit 
to grieving but none to fearing. ducesbeS(l49) military leaders.
ecce in deserto... ecce inpenetralibus (9) Behold, he is in the desert ...
behold, he is in the secret chambers (Matthew xxiv: 26). erant in cffido (40) They 
were full of zeal, and yet rather inclined to
discuss than to execute the orders of their officers. etconversusDeus (31) And God 
turned to behold the works which his
hands had made, and saw that all were very good (Genesis i: 31). exstinctus amabitur 
idem (8) The same man [an object of ill-will while
alive] shall be loved when his light is out
fdberqwsque (111) Every man is the architect of his own fortune.
fen, si (8) Strike, if it be for the good of the Roman people.
fons turbatus (150) A righteous man being cast in his suit in presence
of his adversary, is as a troubled fountain and a corrupt spring
(Proverbs xxv: 26).
haecpro arnidUa (74) These things out of regard for our friendship I
have not concealed. hinc uswa wax (41) Hence usury rapacious, and interest greedily
advancing to the reckoning day, hence credit shaken, and war
that was a gain to many. hocagere (59) keep to the business in hand. honwem delirwn 
(70) A madman, who wrecks weighty realities on
mere verbal subtleties.
idem manebat (117) He remained the same, when it was no longer
becoming to him. igmvumfiicospeais (113) The drones, an idle swarm, they banish from
their hives. Warn terra pea-ens (39) Her did mother Earth inflamed with wrath
against the Gods, bring forth (so runs the story) youngest sister to
Coeus and Enceladus.
illeetiamcaecosetc. (39) \'He also [the sun] often gives warning of dark
rebellions imminent, of treachery and hidden warfare brewing. Winwrsgmvis (30) Death 
falls heavy on him who, too well known to
all others, dies to himself unknown. in illo wo (111) There was in him such strength 
of body and mind
that in whatever rank he had been born, he would have been
likely to win fortune for himself. wiquumpetas (137) Ask for more than is just, in 
order to get what is
just
mmcteconsilium(59) Night brings counsel. in studio rei (97) In his pursuit of wealth 
it was plain that he sought,
not food for avarice, but an instrument of doing good. in sudore vultus alieni (98,113) 
in the sweat of another\'s face. in sudore vultus tui (112) In the sweat of thy face, 
shall thou eat thy
bread (Genesis iii: 19). in veste varietas (10) Let there be variety in the garment, 
but no rent
or cut.
micSafestos (27) Envy keeps no holidays. va hommis (12) The wrath of man doth not 
fulfil the justice of God
(James i: 20).
icon Tiberiwn vires (8) Tiberius was fast losing his bodily strength, but
not his gift of dissimulation. iudicis qffidum (151) It is a judge\'s office to inquire 
not only into the
facts of a case, but into the times and occasions thereof. ins civitatis (83) the 
right of citizenship; ins convnerdi, etc.: the right of
trading, of marriage, of inheritance, of voting, of holding public
office. iuventutemegit (116) He spent a youth full of errors, nay of madnesses.
laudandopmedpere (144) to instruct by praising.
legiase (44) That his soldiers were levied, not bought
libenatores or sahiatores (149) deliverers or saviours.
liberiw quam (40) More freely than was compatible with respect for
their rulers. Uvia, coniugii (8) Farewell, Livia, keep after me the memory of our
marriage.
magmcivitas (72) A great city is a great solitude.
magmficabo (145) I will magnify mine office (Romans xi: 13).
magno oonatu nugas (70) [produce] trifles with great effort.
maSenamsupembitopus (42) The workmanship will excel the material.
meUornatum (46) a better nature.
memento quodes (55) Remember that thou art man - remember that
thou art a God, or God\'s vice-gerent. mitteambos (61) Send them both naked before 
strangers and you shall
see. nwltwn incolajitit (108) My soul hath been a long sojoumer (Psalms
cxx: 6).
negotiispares (SO, 149) (men who are) equal to conducting affairs. iwmen bonwn (144) 
A good name is like a fragrant ointment.
(Ecclesiastes viii: 1) non decs vulgi (46) It is not profane to deny the gods of the 
vulgar: but
it is profane to apply to the gods the beliefs of the vulgar. non estcwwsus (25) An 
inquisitive man is sure to be malevolent also. non est icon dicere (46) We cannot 
now say: As the people, so is the
priest. For in fact the people are not so [bad] as the priest. non inveniet (58) He 
shall not find faith on the earth. (Luke xviii: 8)
cf. Essay l,p.6. nosscimus (153) We know that the law is good, provided that a man
use it lawfully (I Timothy i; 8). mine cUmittis (8) Now lettest thou [thy servant 
depart in peace]
(Luke ii: 29).
octogesimusoctavus (101) eighty-eight, a year of wonders. awasfama (148) All 
reputation comes from those who are of a man\'s
household. omnium consensu (32) All men deemed him fit for empire - had he
never become emperor. omnium quae dixerat (147) He had an art of displaying to 
advantage all
that he said and did.
optimi consiliarii (58) The best counsellors are the dead. optimum eKge (21) Choose 
the best, and custom will make it pleasant
and easy. optimus Ule (107) He best asserts the soul\'s freedom, who snaps the
fetters that gall his breast, and ceases once for all to suffer.
padrecommune (141) common father, father of all alike. parce,puer (92) Boy, spare 
the goad, and pull harder at the reins. partidpesaevnan (73,149) associates in their 
cares.
patrespatriae (149) fathers of their country.
perpetuiproTcipes (148) princes in perpetuity.
persaltwn(26) at a bound.
pessiiman germs (144) the worst sort of enemies, those that praise you.
Philippis itenim (100) Thou shalt see me again at Philippi.
placebo (59) \'I will please\' (Psalms xvi: 9): \'to sing a song of placebo\'
meaning to flatter, to be complaisant plemisnmanonsum(57) I am full of chinks. 
phietsuper mr(151) He shall rain snares upon them (Psalms ix: 6). pocodi motto (111) 
a little of the fool or madman. pompa mortis (7) It is the trappings of death that 
terrify, rather than
death itself. prarwn mobile (40, 48, 141) \'the first moveable\' or \'first moved\'
(Paradise Last 3, line 483), the tenth sphere or heaven of the old
astronomy, which carried round with it in its revolution the
lower spheres of the planets and fixed stars. prindpis est (58) A prince\'s greatest 
virtue is to know his men. prvpagalones or propugnatores imperil (149) Extenders or 
defenders of
empire. prvdens advertjt (63) The wise man takes heed to his own steps: the
fool turns aside to deceits (cf. Proverbs xiv: 15). pulchravm auSwmws pulcher (118) 
The autumn of the beautiful is
beautiful.
quean volwnus licet (47) Esteem ourselves as we may, senators, yet we are not superior 
to the Spaniards in numbers, nor to the Gauls in bodily force, nor to the Carthaginians 
in cunning, nor to the Greeks in arts, nor, indeed, to the Italians and Latins 
themselves in the inborn domestic sentiment which belongs to this land and nation; 
but in piety, and religion, and the one great wisdom - the recognition that all is 
ruled and ordered by the will of the immortal gods - it is here that we have surpassed 
all tribes and peoples.
quantapa6nwr (26) How great are our sufferings!
aid de comeimenda (146) Men who write books \'On the duty of despising Glory\' allow 
their name to appear on the tide-page.
quifestmat (97) He that maketh haste to be rich shall not be innocent (Proverbs xxviii: 
20).
qidjmem vitae (8) [A mind] that reckons the close of life one of Nature\'s boons.
quifortiter emungit (151) The wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood. (Proverbs 
xxx: 33).
respondes, aitero (70) You reply - with one eyebrow lifted to your forehead and the 
other drawn down to your chin - that you are no lover of cruelty.
solus populi (152) The people\'s welfare is the supreme law. satis magnum (28) We are, 
one to another, a theatre (or spectacle)
ample enough. seaindumgenem (58) by classes. se mn cSversas (63) He said he did not 
[like Burrus] cherish hopes
from opposite quarters, but looked simply to the Emperor\'s safety. 
serpensrusiserpentem (111) A serpent unless it has eaten a serpent does
not become a dragon. Siete Parados (149) \'seven parts\' (the title of a digest of the 
laws of
Spain). si vixero (44) If I live, the Roman Empire will have no further need
of soldiers. solus imperantiwn (32) Vespasian, alone among the emperors, was
changed for the better [by empire]. solvam dngula regwn (40) I will loose the girdles 
of kings (Isaiah xlv: 1
^Jobxii:18). sospetto lice/ilia fede (91) Suspicion gives failh [i.e. fidelity] leave 
to
depart [i.e. releases it from all obligation] species virtutibus similes (144) 
appearances resembling virtues. spreta cawenta (144) in disdain of the other\'s 
consciousness [of
imperfection].
swamantes (65) Lovers of themselves without a rival. sunt plerwnque (53) The desires 
of princes are commonly vehement
and contradictory one to another. Sulla nesdwt (44) Sulla was ignorant of letters, 
he could not \'dictate\'.
tanquam unus (141) as one of us (Genesis iii: 22).
tantwnreligio (11) So great the evils to which religion could prompt.
telamhoivnscmsaa\'em (155) honour of a coarser web.
terrapotens (82) A land mighty in arms and in fertility of soil.
testamenta etorbos (99) Childless men and their bequests were caught
by him as in a net. tu quoque, Galba (100) Thou also, Galba, shalt taste of empire.
ubipecoat (120) Where she errs in the one, she runs a risk in the other. 
uhimaprimiscedebant (117) The last of him was not equal to the first. utputo deusfio 
(8) Meseems I am becoming a God.
venaporta (55, 113) the \'gate-vein\' which distributes blood to the
liver. venientamus (100) In later ages there shall come a time, when Ocean
shall loose the bands of nature, and a vast continent shall lie open,
and Tiphys shall disclose new worlds, and Thule shall no longer
be the end of the earth. verperpetuum (127) a perpetual Spring. versatile mgenium 
(111) versatility. vetulam suam (23) He preferred his old wife to immortality [i.e.
Penelope to Calypso]. vinwn daamnum (5) wine of devils.
 
LastIndex

This Free Ebook is Produced 
By "Eshu Space".
Need More Free Ebooks, Pls Go To
http://eshu.yeah.net/ 