




 
BOOK FIRST.--PARIS STUDIED IN ITS ATOM
CHAPTER VII 

　　THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF INDIA
　　 The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste. One might almost say:
　　Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so.
　　This word gamin was printed for the first time, and reached popular speech through the literary tongue, in 1834.
　　It is in a little work entitled Claude Gueux that this word made its appearance. The horror was lively.
　　The word passed into circulation.
　　The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for each other are very various.
　　We have known and associated with one who was greatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall from the top of the tower of Notre-Dame; another, because he had succeeded in making his way into the rear courtyard where the statues of the dome of the Invalides had been temporarily deposited, and had "prigged" some lead from them; a third, because he had seen a diligence tip over; still another, because he "knew" a soldier who came near putting out the eye of a citizen.
　　This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin, a profound epiphonema, which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending,--Dieu de Dieu!
　　What ill-luck I do have! to think that I have never yet seen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window! (I have pronounced I'ave and fifth pronounced fift'.)
　　Surely, this saying of a peasant is a fine one:
　　"Father So-and-So, your wife has died of her malady; why did you not send for the doctor?" "What would you have, sir, we poor folks die of ourselves." But if the peasant's whole passivity lies in this saying, the whole of the free-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is, assuredly, contained in this other saying.
　　A man condemned to death is listening to his confessor in the tumbrel.
　　The child of Paris exclaims: "He is talking to his black cap!
　　Oh, the sneak!"
　　A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin. To be strong-minded is an important item.
　　To be present at executions constitutes a duty.
　　He shows himself at the guillotine, and he laughs.
　　He calls it by all sorts of pet names: The End of the Soup, The Growler, The Mother in the Blue (the sky), The Last Mouthful, etc., etc.
　　In order not to lose anything of the affair, he scales the walls, he hoists himself to balconies, he ascends trees, he suspends himself to gratings, he clings fast to chimneys.
　　The gamin is born a tiler as he is born a mariner. A roof inspires him with no more fear than a mast.
　　There is no festival which comes up to an execution on the Place de Greve. Samson and the Abbe Montes are the truly popular names.
　　They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him.
　　They sometimes admire him. Lacenaire, when a gamin, on seeing the hideous Dautin die bravely, uttered these words which contain a future:
　　"I was jealous of him." In the brotherhood of gamins Voltaire is not known, but Papavoine is. "Politicians" are confused with assassins in the same legend. They have a tradition as to everybody's last garment.
　　It is known that Tolleron had a fireman's cap, Avril an otter cap, Losvel a round hat, that old Delaporte was bald and bare-headed, that Castaing was all ruddy and very handsome, that Bories had a romantic small beard, that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders, that Lecouffe and his mother quarrelled.
　　"Don't reproach each other for your basket," shouted a gamin to them.
　　Another, in order to get a look at Debacker as he passed, and being too small in the crowd, caught sight of the lantern on the quay and climbed it.
　　A gendarme stationed opposite frowned.
　　"Let me climb up, m'sieu le gendarme," said the gamin.
　　And, to soften the heart of the authorities he added: "I will not fall."
　　"I don't care if you do," retorted the gendarme.
　　In the brotherhood of gamins, a memorable accident counts for a great deal.
　　One reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cut one's self very deeply, "to the very bone."
　　The fist is no mediocre element of respect.
　　One of the things that the gamin is fondest of saying is:
　　"I am fine and strong, come now!"
　　To be left-handed renders you very enviable.
　　A squint is highly esteemed.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  