




 
BOOK FIRST.--PARIS STUDIED IN ITS ATOM
CHAPTER XII 

　　THE FUTURE LATENT IN THE PEOPLE
　　 As for the Parisian populace, even when a man grown, it is always the street Arab; to paint the child is to paint the city; and it is for that reason that we have studied this eagle in this arrant sparrow. It is in the faubourgs, above all, we maintain, that the Parisian race appears; there is the pure blood; there is the true physiognomy; there this people toils and suffers, and suffering and toil are the two faces of man.
　　There exist there immense numbers of unknown beings, among whom swarm types of the strangest, from the porter of la Rapee to the knacker of Montfaucon.
　　Fex urbis, exclaims Cicero; mob, adds Burke, indignantly; rabble, multitude, populace.
　　These are words and quickly uttered.
　　But so be it.
　　What does it matter? What is it to me if they do go barefoot!
　　They do not know how to read; so much the worse.
　　Would you abandon them for that?
　　Would you turn their distress into a malediction?
　　Cannot the light penetrate these masses?
　　Let us return to that cry:
　　Light! and let us obstinately persist therein!
　　Light!
　　Light!
　　Who knows whether these opacities will not become transparent?
　　Are not revolutions transfigurations? Come, philosophers, teach, enlighten, light up, think aloud, speak aloud, hasten joyously to the great sun, fraternize with the public place, announce the good news, spend your alphabets lavishly, proclaim rights, sing the Marseillaises, sow enthusiasms, tear green boughs from the oaks.
　　Make a whirlwind of the idea. This crowd may be rendered sublime.
　　Let us learn how to make use of that vast conflagration of principles and virtues, which sparkles, bursts forth and quivers at certain hours.
　　These bare feet, these bare arms, these rags, these ignorances, these abjectnesses, these darknesses, may be employed in the conquest of the ideal. Gaze past the people, and you will perceive truth.
　　Let that vile sand which you trample under foot be cast into the furnace, let it melt and seethe there, it will become a splendid crystal, and it is thanks to it that Galileo and Newton will discover stars.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  