




 
BOOK SECOND.--THE GREAT BOURGEOIS
CHAPTER III 

　　LUC-ESPRIT
　　 At the age of sixteen, one evening at the opera, he had had the honor to be stared at through opera-glasses by two beauties at the same time--ripe and celebrated beauties then, and sung by Voltaire, the Camargo and the Salle.
　　Caught between two fires, he had beaten a heroic retreat towards a little dancer, a young girl named Nahenry, who was sixteen like himself, obscure as a cat, and with whom he was in love.
　　He abounded in memories.
　　He was accustomed to exclaim: "How pretty she was--that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette, the last time I saw her at Longchamps, her hair curled in sustained sentiments, with her come-and-see of turquoises, her gown of the color of persons newly arrived, and her little agitation muff!" He had worn in his young manhood a waistcoat of Nain-Londrin, which he was fond of talking about effusively.
　　"I was dressed like a Turk of the Levant Levantin," said he.
　　Madame de Boufflers, having seen him by chance when he was twenty, had described him as "a charming fool."
　　He was horrified by all the names which he saw in politics and in power, regarding them as vulgar and bourgeois. He read the journals, the newspapers, the gazettes as he said, stifling outbursts of laughter the while.
　　"Oh!" he said, "what people these are!
　　Corbiere!
　　Humann!
　　Casimir Perier! There's a minister for you!
　　I can imagine this in a journal: `M. Gillenorman, minister!' that would be a farce.
　　Well!
　　They are so stupid that it would pass"; he merrily called everything by its name, whether decent or indecent, and did not restrain himself in the least before ladies.
　　He uttered coarse speeches, obscenities, and filth with a certain tranquillity and lack of astonishment which was elegant. It was in keeping with the unceremoniousness of his century. It is to be noted that the age of periphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose.
　　His god-father had predicted that he would turn out a man of genius, and had bestowed on him these two significant names:
　　Luc-Esprit.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  