




 
BOOK SECOND.--THE GREAT BOURGEOIS
CHAPTER VIII 

　　TWO DO NOT MAKE A PAIR
　　 We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand's two daughters.
　　They had come into the world ten years apart.
　　In their youth they had borne very little resemblance to each other, either in character or countenance, and had also been as little like sisters to each other as possible.
　　The youngest had a charming soul, which turned towards all that belongs to the light, was occupied with flowers, with verses, with music, which fluttered away into glorious space, enthusiastic, ethereal, and was wedded from her very youth, in ideal, to a vague and heroic figure.
　　The elder had also her chimera; she espied in the azure some very wealthy purveyor, a contractor, a splendidly stupid husband, a million made man, or even a prefect; the receptions of the Prefecture, an usher in the antechamber with a chain on his neck, official balls, the harangues of the town-hall, to be "Madame la Prefete,"--all this had created a whirlwind in her imagination.
　　Thus the two sisters strayed, each in her own dream, at the epoch when they were young girls. Both had wings, the one like an angel, the other like a goose.
　　No ambition is ever fully realized, here below at least. No paradise becomes terrestrial in our day.
　　The younger wedded the man of her dreams, but she died.
　　The elder did not marry at all.
　　At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which we are relating, she was an antique virtue, an incombustible prude, with one of the sharpest noses, and one of the most obtuse minds that it is possible to see.
　　A characteristic detail; outside of her immediate family, no one had ever known her first name. She was called Mademoiselle Gillenormand, the elder.
　　In the matter of cant, Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have given points to a miss.
　　Her modesty was carried to the other extreme of blackness.
　　She cherished a frightful memory of her life; one day, a man had beheld her garter.
　　Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty.
　　Her guimpe was never sufficiently opaque, and never ascended sufficiently high. She multiplied clasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking.
　　The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels in proportion as the fortress is the less menaced.
　　Nevertheless, let him who can explain these antique mysteries of innocence, she allowed an officer of the Lancers, her grand nephew, named Theodule, to embrace her without displeasure.
　　In spite of this favored Lancer, the label:
　　Prude, under which we have classed her, suited her to absolute perfection.
　　Mademoiselle Gillenormand was a sort of twilight soul.
　　Prudery is a demi-virtue and a demi-vice.
　　To prudery she added bigotry, a well-assorted lining.
　　She belonged to the society of the Virgin, wore a white veil on certain festivals, mumbled special orisons, revered "the holy blood," venerated "the sacred heart," remained for hours in contemplation before a rococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was inaccessible to the rank and file of the faithful, and there allowed her soul to soar among little clouds of marble, and through great rays of gilded wood.
　　She had a chapel friend, an ancient virgin like herself, named Mademoiselle Vaubois, who was a positive blockhead, and beside whom Mademoiselle Gillenormand had the pleasure of being an eagle.
　　Beyond the Agnus Dei and Ave Maria, Mademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge of anything except of the different ways of making preserves.
　　Mademoiselle Vaubois, perfect in her style, was the ermine of stupidity without a single spot of intelligence.
　　Let us say it plainly, Mademoiselle Gillenormand had gained rather than lost as she grew older.
　　This is the case with passive natures. She had never been malicious, which is relative kindness; and then, years wear away the angles, and the softening which comes with time had come to her.
　　She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not herself know the secret.
　　There breathed from her whole person the stupor of a life that was finished, and which had never had a beginning.
　　She kept house for her father.
　　M. Gillenormand had his daughter near him, as we have seen that Monseigneur Bienvenu had his sister with him.
　　These households comprised of an old man and an old spinster are not rare, and always have the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning on each other for support.
　　There was also in this house, between this elderly spinster and this old man, a child, a little boy, who was always trembling and mute in the presence of M. Gillenormand.
　　M. Gillenormand never addressed this child except in a severe voice, and sometimes, with uplifted cane:
　　"Here, sir! rascal, scoundrel, come here!-- Answer me, you scamp!
　　Just let me see you, you good-for-nothing!" etc., etc.
　　He idolized him.
　　This was his grandson.
　　We shall meet with this child again later on.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  