




 
BOOK THIRD.--IN THE YEAR 1817
CHAPTER VI 

　　A CHAPTER IN WHICH THEY ADORE EACH OTHER
　　Chat at table, the chat of love; it is as impossible to reproduce one as the other; the chat of love is a cloud; the chat at table is smoke.
　　Fameuil and Dahlia were humming.
　　Tholomyes was drinking.Zephine was laughing, Fantine smiling, Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had purchased at Saint-Cloud.
　　Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said:--
　　"Blachevelle, I adore you."
　　This called forth a question from Blachevelle:--
　　"What would you do, Favourite, if I were to cease to love you?"
　　"I!" cried Favourite.
　　"Ah!
　　Do not say that even in jest!If you were to cease to love me, I would spring after you, I would scratch you, I should rend you, I would throw you into the water, I would have you arrested."
　　Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled in his self-love. Favourite resumed:--
　　"Yes, I would scream to the police!
　　Ah!
　　I should not restrain myself, not at all!
　　Rabble!"
　　Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair, in an ecstasy, and closed both eyes proudly.
　　Dahlia, as she ate, said in a low voice to Favourite, amid the uproar:--
　　"So you really idolize him deeply, that Blachevelle of yours?"
　　"I?
　　I detest him," replied Favourite in the same tone, seizing her fork again.
　　"He is avaricious.
　　I love the little fellow opposite me in my house.
　　He is very nice, that young man; do you know him?One can see that he is an actor by profession.
　　I love actors.As soon as he comes in, his mother says to him:
　　`Ah! mon Dieu! my peace of mind is gone.
　　There he goes with his shouting.
　　But, my dear, you are splitting my head!'
　　So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets, to black holes, as high as he can mount, and there he sets to singing, declaiming, how do I know what? so that he can be heard down stairs!He earns twenty sous a day at an attorney's by penning quibbles.He is the son of a former precentor of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas. Ah! he is very nice.
　　He idolizes me so, that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes, he said to me:
　　`Mamselle, make your gloves into fritters, and I will eat them.'
　　It is only artists who can say such things as that.
　　Ah! he is very nice.I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow.Never mind; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him--how I lie!
　　Hey!
　　How I do lie!"
　　Favourite paused, and then went on:--
　　"I am sad, you see, Dahlia.
　　It has done nothing but rain all summer; the wind irritates me; the wind does not abate.
　　Blachevelle is very stingy; there are hardly any green peas in the market; one does not know what to eat.
　　I have the spleen, as the English say, butter is so dear! and then you see it is horrible, here we are dining in a room with a bed in it, and that disgusts me with life."



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  