




 
BOOK FIRST.-WATERLOO
CHAPTER I 

　　WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES 
　　Last year (1861), on a beautiful May morning, a traveller, the personwho is telling this story, was coming from Nivelles, and directinghis course towards La Hulpe. He was on foot. He was pursuinga broad paved road, which undulated between two rows of trees,over the hills which succeed each other, raise the road and let itfall again, and produce something in the nature of enormous waves.
　　He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac. In the west heperceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud, which hasthe form of a reversed vase. He had just left behind a wood uponan eminence; and at the angle of the cross-road, by the sideof a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription AncientBarrier No. 4, a public house, bearing on its front this sign: At the Four Winds (Aux Quatre Vents). Echabeau, Private Cafe.
　　A quarter of a league further on, he arrived at the bottom of alittle valley, where there is water which passes beneath an archmade through the embankment of the road. The clump of sparselyplanted but very green trees, which fills the valley on one side ofthe road, is dispersed over the meadows on the other, and disappearsgracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud.
　　On the right, close to the road, was an inn, with a four-wheeled cartat the door, a large bundle of hop-poles, a plough, a heap of driedbrushwood near a flourishing hedge, lime smoking in a square hole,and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions. A young girl was weeding in a field, where a huge yellow poster,probably of some outside spectacle, such as a parish festival,was fluttering in the wind. At one corner of the inn, beside a poolin which a flotilla of ducks was navigating, a badly paved path plungedinto the bushes. The wayfarer struck into this.
　　After traversing a hundred paces, skirting a wall of thefifteenth century, surmounted by a pointed gable, with bricks setin contrast, he found himself before a large door of arched stone,with a rectilinear impost, in the sombre style of Louis XIV., flankedby two flat medallions. A severe facade rose above this door;a wall, perpendicular to the facade, almost touched the door,and flanked it with an abrupt right angle. In the meadowbefore the door lay three harrows, through which, in disorder,grew all the flowers of May. The door was closed. The two decrepitleaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker.
　　The sun was charming; the branches had that soft shivering of May,which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind. A brave little bird, probably a lover, was carolling in a distractedmanner in a large tree.
　　The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation,resembling the hollow of a sphere, in the stone on the left,at the foot of the pier of the door.
　　At this moment the leaves of the door parted, and a peasantwoman emerged.
　　She saw the wayfarer, and perceived what he was looking at.
　　"It was a French cannon-ball which made that," she said to him. And she added:--
　　"That which you see there, higher up in the door, near a nail,is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg. The bullet didnot pierce the wood."
　　"What is the name of this place?" inquired the wayfarer.
　　"Hougomont," said the peasant woman.
　　The traveller straightened himself up. He walked on a few paces,and went off to look over the tops of the hedges. On the horizonthrough the trees, he perceived a sort of little elevation,and on this elevation something which at that distance resembleda lion.
　　He was on the battle-field of Waterloo.



LastIndexNext

? Victor Hugo

 
  